Questions.
We always appreciate that. So, um,
yeah, for sure. In your hands.
Got, thank you. Um,
just introduce my name as Carolyn Young.
I'm the Chief Executive at Retail nz and my colleague here,
Denise Garland, I'm the manager advice, advocacy
and communications at Retail NZ as well. Cool.
So look, um, thank you for the opportunity to present.
We won't read our submission, it's relatively brief
and we'll take it as read.
We, um, you know, and by
and large do support, um, the submission as it's written.
I guess there's probably just a couple of key areas
that we would bring to your attention.
I think from a retail spec perspective, it's, um, you know,
retail is always interested in public safety
because you need to operate stores in an environment that,
uh, people feel safe that they want to come into.
We know that, you know, 85% of retail, uh,
sales are done in store.
So the safety of those settings is really important
for a retail community.
Um, and you've got to balance that perspective
of public safety against the, um, affordability of,
um, leases and ownership of buildings that retailers occupy.
And, and where we find that right balance to make sure
that the, um, parameters are set correctly so
that we make sure that it's safe and feasible for everyone.
Um, and I think we, you know, one
of the questions we had really was around the level
of consultation done with the insurance industry
to really understand what do they feel about these changes?
Does that make any difference at all to how they perceive?
Does that increase the risk
because they, um, the way they price their models,
or is it decrease the risk if we are saying the risk is
lower and you don't need to do strengthening?
So it'd be really useful to understand, um,
how the insurance industry categorizes that,
because if they think that the buildings would be less safe
with less work being done,
they'll probably increase the insurance costs,
which will be inflationary increased prices for everyone.
So just trying to understand, you know, where they sit on
that as assessment.
And then one of the other things we thought a little bit
about was, you know, really about getting those consistency,
um, of opinions from engineers.
We know that engineers are critically important
to this process around really understanding what needs
to be done to businesses
and how do we ensure that across the engineering sector
that there is consistency in that decision making process so
that, um, you know, oc you know, people
that are leasing buildings
or own buildings have certainty of tenure.
So they'd probably be the key, um, the key perspectives
and we know it's hard to strike the balance,
but just making sure we get that right is gonna be important
because we know that we are in a country
where there are seismic issues
and there will be future seismic issues.
We don't wanna look back and say
the settings were weren't quite right.
Cool. Cool. Right. Questions fine, please. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you for coming in today.
Um, it's around the, the point that you've, you've made
around what the insurance company sort of, you know,
or sector industry sort of thinks.
And I think you've outlined the, the two options really.
Either it's gonna mitigate premiums or it won't.
Um, are you aware of any sort of
conversations that have been taking place?
No. Half of, of your,
Yeah, not, not aware
of any conversations that have taken place.
And I guess we're interested in maybe the consultation
that might have happened through this process
with the insurance sector.
Um, because, uh, we all pay insurance
and we know how insurance companies work
and I'd hate to think it's gonna escalate prices.
That's the, um,
and then if they're thinking that it provides more risk,
then there'd be the question, are we doing the right thing?
So just getting that balance right
and making sure that the wider community feels
that we've got that balance.
Right.
I have two questions. One of them is the insurance one.
Mm-hmm. Um, just on insurance mean,
what I've seen from insurers
or from building owners is that even when they strengthen
to the highest debris base isolate
and everything, they told us the insurance industry doesn't
make a jot of difference.
Um, and, but the other part is
that the insurers are generally focused on, um,
risk property not to loss of life.
And of course the system was all about loss
of life rather than property.
So it didn't make any difference to the I insurers
in that, in that, um, way.
But the one question, um, just in terms of
that safety balance, um,
do you think at the moment the proposition is
that we don't put notices on buildings at all?
Um, if they are, um, earthquake prone,
so they can be earthquake prone but don't need work done on,
or they could be earthquake prone
and need work done on them, or they could be taken out of,
but not be deep, deep earthquake prone at all.
But, so if a building is earthquake prone
but doesn't need any work done on it, do you think
that people using that building should have a right
to be able to see that on the building?
Say, okay, it's earthquake, right? Yeah.
Big deal I'd go into
or Mm, actually maybe I won't for that choice.
So it's that, that you talk about safety balance. It,
It is a really tricky one, isn't it?
Because if it doesn't need any work done, if we,
Well, it doesn't need any work done by law doesn't,
it's gonna stand up in earthquake. It's,
So I guess it depends on, on, from my perspective,
I would think that we'd wanna make sure
that people can find the information if they want to.
So it's about, you know, is there a notice where you can go
to a link and then find out what work might need to be done?
If it's just, 'cause you know,
it's how long is a piece of string?
Like if something's at this end of the, the scale,
which is gonna make mineral difference to the,
the seismic strengthening
of the building versus actually something a bit more
substantive, you might have a view on it.
So I think, um, I think in this day
and age notification is good.
Um, so that everybody's aware. Yeah,
It strikes me that it's probably a lot easier if I'm going
shopping to, um,
actually see the notice on the building rather than go,
I wonder when I go online for every building I go into,
you just don't, people don't shop like that, do
They? No. No, they don't. And
these day
and age, you can just put a QR code on there as well.
So if people wanna find out, they can just go to the QR code
and, and off you go.
So that, you know, it's the easiest way to do it.
Okay. Thank you. Any other questions?
Doesn't look like it.
Can I, is there anything else you wanna say yet? Can
I back your, your point that you made
about the insurance industry?
Just, um, you, the way that they rate things
and so yes, we understand
that they would rate it based on whether there's risk
to the building or not, but risk to the building
or not is also aligned to risk to people, you know, um,
if you're gonna, if a building's gonna collapse, you know,
if it's during the day, there may
well be damage to people as well. So
Yeah. Without getting a debate,
sometimes the building might not
collapse, but it might not be usable afterwards
and need to be taken down.
And we've had plenty of those, so. Yeah.
For sure. Yeah. I've seen the nods at the bang. Yeah.
Yeah. For the people
that are genuinely experts in this. Yeah,
Exactly. I'm sure there's plenty
of experts behind me
that know more than I do, that's for sure. Thank you.
Thank you very much. We appreciate it. Good. See,
Thanks.
Right? Uh, no, what else to you?
Oh, right, okay. Oh, are we ahead of time?
Two minutes? We're ahead of time by a couple of minutes.
Sorry. Wanna take a short break?
We'll take a short break then.
Um, 'cause I think it's too much like hard work getting the
officials back up here for seven minutes and
because these, these guys have to duck out
and back into a private session again.
So we'll take a break till, let's say three minutes passed
and then, um, it gives you five minutes,
three minutes passed, and then we'll, um, resume again.
Okay. Yeah,
sorry.
Uh, David's coming from. Okay. Right. Okay, cool.
Thanks guys. Just waiting for Carlos.
Is Carlos back on? Yes, he's
Here.
Excellent. I see that. Right. Okay.
Well let's get David in.
Thank you. Right,
David, can we see?
Yes. Have you got your, got your, um, camera on?
I'm looking for it,
Looking promising that There
Now that's you there, right? Okay,
good, good to see you.
Um, we've got you down for, we've got your submission,
we've got you down for five minutes.
Um, I'll give you a call with two to go, um,
if you wanna highlight any key key elements, um,
that's great and your submission.
Um, and if you wanna ask,
answer some questions, that's great too.
So your time starts now.
Very, very much so.
Um, David Marsh, um, uh,
of Leeton, uh, and
David, I'm a Fifth David, sorry.
And owner of Holly Farm. David,
David, I'm gonna stop just for a moment.
Yes. You are breaking up very badly, certainly at this end.
Sorry, this video. Can you,
I was just gonna suggest you having turned your video on,
maybe, maybe we'll try turning your video off
and if that helps the, um, the, the communication.
Yeah, just sometimes it works, right? Okay.
You're still there, David?
Yes, I am. Right. Okay. Okay, let's start.
We'll start again and, um, time starts now.
Thank you. Yes, so I'm, I'm David Marshall, I'm of leeton,
and that is in the Selwyn District.
I'm a fifth generation farmer and, um, and I own Holly Farm.
Um, my opinion, uh, my opinion is based on lived experience
and I am born and raised member of, um, the SME district.
My concern, uh, sits around, um,
risk and workable settings, uh,
that are being considered when evaluating
established facilities that are historical, um,
community con contributing
and represent the community's culture
and activities that are, um, that have been,
uh, established over the, over the centuries
and, uh, and range around the,
um, repairs
and maintenance, which I believe, um, are
of the highest importance.
I've seen a lot of damage done, um,
and it's been in the best cases, uh, minimalized
by protection from the elements, uh,
for future repairs.
But sadly, I've also witnessed facilities that have been,
uh, really abandoned out of willful neglect.
And, um, this is where I, uh,
feel that it's, um, really important that we
consider the, um, the facilities that are, that have,
that have been made available to communities are
actually valued, uh, outside or,
and including, um, an affordable, uh,
level of, of finance.
Now, some of the, um,
facilities obviously are district owned
and some are, um, owned by sports bodies,
um, and the likes of, or, um,
or are in conjunction with each other, um, alongside,
uh, the districts, um, or the,
or the community's, um, usage uses.
Um, I don't know, uh,
this is the first time I've done anything like this,
so it's, it's all a wee, but, um, well done.
But you're going well, thank you.
Um, I know that, uh,
if I could sort of speak to, uh, one, one particular,
um, concern is that in lea we have, um, the
original buildings where, uh,
where the SME district council,
you've got about two minutes left.
Thank you. Were, um, housed
and then they were shifted, uh, when the sale
and district council set up in Rollon,
but the old buildings were then turned into our lease
medical center, which has been a huge, um, asset
to, to the district.
And in the back of, uh, that area was our, uh,
least in public library, which, um, served a perfect, uh,
position and, um,
and a valuable contribution to our least in primary school,
safe and quiet and also et cetera.
But the building was actually, um, lit, uh,
open to, um, to, uh, the roof leaking
and so forth, which is consider con ended up
with the library being closed
and, uh, up for demolition, which I believe is the case.
Uh, financially viably needs to be done.
So, but, uh,
but I do hope that, um, the replacement, uh, of that sort
of facility is considered, um, in, in context with the,
um, placement of,
or replacement of the, uh, current position.
And, um, I just feel that we need to be very practical.
We need to make sure that the, um, options are affordable
and that the, um, uh, loss
to the community as it has always been successful,
needs to be upheld If, um, if that's a
conclusion I can make.
Thank you, David. Uh, David,
we've got about 10 seconds left, so I'm gonna jump in
and take one quick question if I can.
Um, yes. And I see,
I hopefully I'll get some nods at the, in the back there.
So with a lot of the buildings you're talking about places
like Leeton, which is under 10,000 population, um,
and, uh, buildings in rural areas as far as I can read, um,
the, the way in which this will work, they would be, uh,
only required to be on the, the register
and in fact would not need to be strengthened.
I'm getting nods from the back. So the, the legislation
as it is may well fix most of the problems
that you're talking about by essentially making those
buildings not earthquake prone anymore,
and I'm getting some nods at the back.
Yep. Yes. Does that help, does that help you, David?
That really does. Um, it, it, it definitely, uh, gives,
um, a positive, uh, spin on, on what we've sort of been led
to, um, understand
and, uh, limitations that, that are less, um,
can be applied, which is fantastic, which I appreciate.
David, thank you very much.
We really appreciate it, and well done. Thank
You. Thank
you. Bye.
Right, uh, we've got BES next up. Rob, nice to see you.
Okay, nice to see you. See you.
So thank you very much for the opportunity to speak
to you today, and we certainly welcome any
questions on our submissions.
My name is Rob Uri.
I'm Be's Chief Structural Engineer
and have participated in all matters associated
with earthquake Engineering.
Over my career, spanning 45 years, I was an expert witness
for the Royal Commission following the
Christchurch Earthquakes.
And for the last three decades,
I participated in the development of codes practice
and guidance to support industry
and government led mitigation programs in
New Zealand and internationally.
Becca was responsible for preparing the economic analysis,
which I advised on that informed those legislation.
My colleague Henry Tatham,
as a Becca's Structural Technical Director, Henry,
has contributed significantly to the preparation
of industry guidance on assessment
and performance of existing buildings.
Our submission is intended to be bipartisan in nature
and is presented on behalf of Becca
and employee owned company operating globally
with 2000 New Zealand based employees,
including 280 structural engineers.
Becca agrees with the premise
that the current legislation has led to an unsustainable
position for many in the community
and force non-compliances no useful purpose.
We support the overall direction of the bill
and agree that it is appropriate for the government
to establish the settings
for tolerable risk on behalf of the community.
At Becca. We have always supported pragmatic approach
to seismic risk mitigation,
and what is now proposed is no different.
Our submission outlines several aspects which we feel
warrant further consideration and review.
We will cover five of these in this presentation.
The first point, we agree that the likelihood
of shaking an Auckland City is low in comparison
with other large urban centers.
However, the likelihood is not zero.
And there is evidence that at the Aland area has
historically been subjected to significant earthquakes.
Traditional cost benefit analyses
and the cost benefit ratios that resolved from them need
to be considered carefully
and are likely to promote appropriate decisions
have solely relied on when a response to low probability.
But high consequence events like earthquakes is considered.
There are buildings and parts of Auckland City
that would be vulnerable to any shaking
and present a significant risk to the public.
The public examples might be unreinforced masonry buildings
in and around exits to train stations.
And on Queen Street, it is Becca's opinion
that at the very least buildings in this type
of setting should be identified on a register.
He, even if there's no statutory requirement to upgrade.
This is similar to the approach proposed
for small unreinforced masonry buildings in small rural
towns, which seems an appropriate minimum response.
The second point has currently proposed the change
of use amendments represented a significant lost opportunity
to upgrade existing buildings for earthquakes resilience
at a time when significant cost has often been expanded.
And arguably, the clock on remaining building
life is being reset.
Appropriate change of use provisions will safeguard
and body carbon retention, as well as improving resilience.
The unintended consequence of no requirement
for seismic resilience in Auckland for such buildings would,
in our view, be a perverse outcome.
Point three. We note
that the approach taken in the proposed changes
to the Health Safety
and Workplace Act
that are now available does not consider seismic
matters as a critical risk.
This significantly reduced any tension
between the two pieces of legislation that we did prefer
to in our submission.
Fourth point, the proposed changes
to the settings in both the EPB bill and the Health Safety
and Workplace Act, uh, will,
while considered acceptable in their own right,
represent a significant change to current incentives
to seismically upgrade buildings outside the EPB framework,
particularly in our most seismically active areas,
the government must continue to support development
of guidance and articulate tolerable risk settings
for all existing buildings from a community resilience
perspective, rather than just for individual buildings.
If the government does not do this, we ask
who does this responsibility fall to?
And the final point funding will remain an issue for some
of those still required to retrofit.
This will need to be addressed if
non-compliance is to be avoided.
We thank you for listening to us our, um, opening remarks,
and we're happy to respond to any questions.
Thank you. I'll just look for questions I got, uh, Simon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, uh,
for your detailed submission.
Uh, I am concerned about some of the matters that you raise,
uh, around change of use requirements in 6.2.
Uh, you suggest that when conversions,
building conversions occur, um,
there's already gonna be significant cost
and that is the time to, um, to deal with the seismic risk.
But isn't it the case that many buildings are not being
upgraded, improved, having their use change
because the building owners can't actually realize, uh,
or recover the cost of doing the seismic work, uh,
for an old building with a, you know, limited ability
to change its floor plan?
Uh, and isn't that the whole purpose of this legislation
to provide that flexibility?
Yes, I, I accept your point.
Um, however, there are buildings in Auckland now
that we are involved with, which is changing from commercial
to hospital, for example.
And, uh, under the current regime, they're required
to upgrade those nearest reasonably practicable
to new standard for hospital
and in appropriate use that will disappear.
I, I believe that if you want
to safeguard against situations you've mentioned
that may be legitimate
and worthy of a, a separate, um, part of
that clause rather than a cup blanche across the whole
change of use activity.
Any other questions? Yeah, thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, thank you for your comments on Auckland, uh,
somehow being identified or, or included.
Um, the bill also excludes two other areas,
which the Chatham Islands and Northland.
Do you have any views on, on those comparative
to the Auckland position you've, you've taken from?
No, I think we've settled, we, we've settled on Auckland
as being a risk question rather than likelihood
of shaking question.
And it's the high density of population
and, um, people outside buildings in Auckland.
It's the concern in terms of risk.
So we are not
so concerned about the low likelihood regions further north
in the Chatham Islands.
Right. Thank you. I'm not sure the
Chatham's got that many tall.
You never know. You never know.
Um, look, can I just ask, um, one question
that you talked about, the, the government must continue
to support, essentially community resilience.
Is that the basis of the, we've got this, um, suggestion
of having or proposal of having, um, uh, buildings,
which are, are earthquake prone listed, um,
but you don't have to do anything with them.
Is that what we're, is that the particular thing
that you are identifying?
I I think the point I'm identifying is that the settings
that are, will be in, if this goes to, um, becomes the act,
then the, it's the settings
that are both in the earthquake prone, uh,
building Amendment Act and also in the health safety
and Work Place act.
Those, both those settings quite legitimate in their own
right for each of those legislations,
but they do change the settings generally.
And, um, relying totally on market moral obligations
for people to upgrade buildings, I think is won't be enough.
It needs some, some direction, some assistance to, um,
push for anything
outside the earthquake frame building. Mm-hmm.
So I was gonna ask you specifically about that issue
of market because at the moment, um, you see lots
and lots of buildings, particularly commercial buildings,
um, where the first thing in the market,
and most particularly in Wellington, is it's 75,
it's 80% whatever, um, of MBS.
Um, if you don't put, if you don't see anything there,
you probably think it's lower than that,
but people say that that will go.
So what, do you have any thoughts around
how the market will say, actually,
I'm happy being in that building.
I'm not so happy being in that building.
Well, we, we know from experience
that the market has completely turned off in Auckland,
any retrofit was proposed, is no longer going ahead
and the assessments that were proposed,
No, sorry, that's a different matter.
Yeah. My, the point I'm trying to get to is, as,
as a potential tenant, am I going to go into a building
at the moment I say I, I'm not going into a building at 40%
of MBSI, I want 80.
Um, but if you don't have that regime,
how do you think the market's gonna respond
to the new regime in terms of willingness to say, I,
I'm willing to go and lease that building.
I'm not willing to, to lease
that building on, on seismic basis. Yes.
No, it's hard to say because I think, I think these new,
um, new settings might change all of that as well.
So, you know, there won't be any requirements to, um,
upgrade to high levels from a market perspective.
Um, not that there are now, except that the health
and safety work act, I think forced people to consider it.
Uh, if that goes, then I think it'll be totally up
to individual, um, tenants and
We just, we'll just watch and see what they do.
Well, we have to watch and see what we do,
but we could be living with for,
for a very long time in Wellington,
which is my major concern.
Yeah, I understand. Thank you. Look, really appreciate it.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Okay, uh, next up we have, uh, councilor Elizabeth Mu,
who's on Zoom,
Selwyn, are you there, Elizabeth?
Yeah, I ity Elizabeth, is she there?
Uh, yep. Just getting on she,
Elizabeth, nice to see you there.
Welcome. I think you're on mute at the moment.
Say, say something. How is that working now?
That's working fine. That's great. Okay, cool.
We nice to see you there.
We've got your submission, so you can take that as red,
but if you want to highlight anything, you please do that.
Um, and, uh, I'll give you a call with two minutes to go so
that if you do want to leave time for questions,
then we've got a little bit of time.
So, um, away you go.
Thank you very much and just want to, uh, reiterate
that I'm here on behalf, um, of my community
and as an independent, not not the Selwyn District Council.
Um, so firstly, I just wanna point out that due
to the heat map that you have, uh, our location,
the south island is still in the red zone,
so we will still be more affected than
other areas of the country.
And from what we understand from our staff's interpretation
of the bill, that that will mean there'll be no change
to the earthquake Stickered buildings.
In my district, I have in my own ward,
we have at least eight buildings, which we greatly affected.
And some of these are heritage,
and that's only the ones that I'm aware of.
Um, I would also like to, um, to talk about
how you've got, uh, in my, in my, um, written submission,
I agreed with a number of things, which you can see there,
and, but I've put provisions in
and I felt that we, you've got townships
with under 10,000 people that there are exemptions,
but I wonder whether in some
of the largest cities you've got suburbs in which you have
similar usage of, uh, low level frequency facilities,
which also should be included.
So I'm wondering whether there should be play space
solutions across the board.
Um, I would also like to encourage there to be a protection
of heritage buildings.
I think that we've got an opportunity here to review the way
that we do heritage in New Zealand.
Some of that should be working with the heritage providers
and networks that we have already existing,
but also looking at whether we can do, um,
a middle ground in which some of the facilities
that we have, and for example in my district, we've got, um,
some beautiful historic churches,
but they will not be able to provide the funds
that are required to retain the building.
And so with this, I'm wondering whether there is an
opportunity in which we have what they have in Australia
with some of their heritage, um,
houses in which the front facade is required,
but the back of the property is able to be changed
and altered and, and modernized for continual use,
or whether we can look at having sh brick work,
sh stone work facades on some of our churches
and potentially other buildings to retain them.
Um, I would like to see that there is a prevention
for land banking of historical buildings on
properties by developers.
I think it's important that there is
a requirement from anyone that has one of these types
of properties that they are doing something with them.
And we are seeing a bit of that happening at the moment
where people are retaining these facilities, um,
these beautiful stark properties,
but they're not doing anything with them in the hope
that they'll eventually fall down.
I would like to propose a new safety matrix, one
that identifies the proximity to foot traffic,
high user groups, um, other vulnerabilities,
the patronage in the frequency of use.
And that, for example, would give us the ability for, uh,
in our district, a church building
that's used only once a month for a handful, um, of patrons
that that would be on a lower risk tier compared
to something like a 24 7 aged care facility at the moment,
that church in itself has an $80,000 requirement
to upgrade and strengthen one end
of the church building stage work sign.
We've about a minute, Elizabeth,
you've got about a minute and a half
To speak faster stage work sign offs rather than full
earthquake strengthening by a set date.
I think if we can find a way in which not the entire
buildings, uh, have to be required to be strengthened,
but just partially would, um, certainly assist in this way
creating a government en a government entity
with nationwide inspections, um, I'm pretty sure
that's in my written submission,
but if we could have a team which are doing these, um,
these inspections at the moment, um,
that would really assist our communities to continue that
with their community facilities.
Thank you. Any questions? Okay,
Thank you. Got about a minute
for questions if there anybody got any?
I don't see any, but look, I do have one question
which I'll ask as a question.
I asked of David Marshall earlier,
and I'm kind of asking it
to the people at the back of the room.
Um, because the, if you've, if you've looked through the,
um, the way in which the remediation measures, um, work,
if you are outside an urban center, so 10,000
or less population, which includes ton.
So we did look that up specifically for David.
Um, and you, uh, have a one
or two story building, then you only,
that's even if it's an unreinforced masonary building,
so it'd be your churches, et cetera, then you only have
to do the, uh, beyond the earthquake prone register.
You don't actually have to do any work on it.
So I think most of the buildings you're referring to,
certainly it's the case for David situation,
which is the same district, um, that most
of those buildings would come off the list in terms
of actually having to do work.
But that's fantastic, Andy.
We were told by our staff that
because we were in the red zone on your heat map, that
that wouldn't apply to us in our district.
I'm presuming by, I'm presuming by the red zone.
You don't mean the Christchurch red zone, you mean the, um,
no, the the high risk overall area.
Correct. Yep.
Okay. I don't think that's the case,
but we will, we will make sure there's some communication
back to you to confirm that.
Thank you very much. Appreciate that.
Really appreciate it. Okay, thank you. Right.
We now have, uh, cathedral welcome.
Oh, that's terrible. And
right, so look, welcome.
And I gather, this is, I'm told this is a hybrid.
So you've got, this is somebody on Zoom,
you are here and somebody else is on
Zoom. We should have Graham
O'Brien on Zoom Graham.
Okay. We'll just hold, hold fire until there.
Um, you've got the gist of things,
but you know, we've got the
submission, which you've take of read.
I know you've given us some extra information.
Um, but, um, you know, if you want to leave some time
for questions, we always appreciate that as well.
So, is he there yet? There he is. There he is. Okay.
Can you hear me? Welcome, Graham. Um, got Michael as well.
So right in your, in your hands,
Andy. Thank you. Um,
so Graham's dean of Nelson Cathedral.
He and I, uh, co-chair governance group
around cathedral strengthening for Nelson Cathedral
and for enhancements, um, we value the time
that you'll come back to us at the end of this.
So we've, we've divided what is on this piece
of paper into two
and hopefully leave 3, 4, 5 minutes for you
to throw things back at us.
So Graham, our hundred year old heritage building,
Uh, as you would see in our submission, um, Michael
and I are here today in general
to support the proposed changes.
But we do wanna highlight, um, the significance of buildings
that do not neatly fit into generalized categories.
And their specific inclusion, uh,
we believe is a re required in the proposed legislation.
So Nelson Cathedral is a case in point, uh,
but it would not be a loan, uh, in that being
not just a regular parish church,
but also a large cathedral.
It's built for 40 years.
It's of mixed construction with the early stage where most
of the people sit being marble at beginning 1925.
And then the final northern part,
which has the bell tower in the 1960s being
constructed of concrete.
These buildings are often situated not on a street frontage.
Uh, and in our case, we sit situated in a park-like setting,
uh, on hill in the center of Nelson.
These buildings often have very unusual shapes,
not your square or rectangular school or office block.
And these need to be considered
because those shapes may, uh,
increase risk at various points
of the building, not the whole building.
And they also have episodic moments of occupation
services in our case services
and concerts, which are services every week,
conference once a month, um, on general per hour.
There may be 10 people in the building
across a a 12 hour day.
Um, so we believe that these, uh, are factors
that should be taken into point.
These buildings often have high cultural,
spiritual and social value.
Um, so it's important that they, uh, continue to be used
and to function in the community,
but also do so in a manner that's safe, uh,
because that's a concern for us all.
So we believe that this may justify lower risk thresholds,
targeted remediation, longer timeframes, uh,
especially since these buildings are largely funded through
donations by the regular pensioners, uh, parishioners, some
of which, most of which are pensioners
and later for bigger works,
we often rely then on public donation.
So our view is that any new regulations need
to acknowledge the distinctive character of such buildings
and, uh, the unique recognition,
low occupancy would propose less risk.
We need this in the le legislation to provide certainty
as we all think, to mitigate risk, uh,
and operate in the best way for public safety.
Over to you, Michael.
Thanks, Graham. So, um, what is our ask?
We don't have an ask, we're not asking for favors
or exemptions, but we have a few ideas that we have put down
and would, you know, just have on the table to think about.
Um, to start with,
consider staged programs managed serious risk first, right?
Go to where the, um,
the elephant on the table is the elephant in the room.
Consider that as part of cathedrals like ours
or heritage buildings, the criticality of fundraising.
So staging, um, approaches over time is important.
So developer, for an example,
develop an engineer endorsed plan, prioritizing
and tackling the most significant hazards first,
have check-ins and gatekeepers separately.
This concept of investing in a national shared capability,
um, for, for Graham
and I, this is probably the only cathedral we'll ever have
to deal with like this.
And I imagine it's like that
for many other heritage buildings.
If there was, for example, technical panels
or specialist advice
or ways that similar communities
to ours could access expertise rather than starting from
scratch every time,
that could be something that's very helpful.
So support systems, um, unintended consequences,
just two of them to think about.
Uh, earlier in the afternoon you heard several
conversations around insurance.
We've heard a similar conversation.
The insurance companies saying that,
don't worry if even if the NBS guidelines go,
we'll still take our money from you or,
or refuse to, um, um, to insure you.
So the insurance conversation, I, I appreciate
that you'll look at, um,
second unintended consequence lessons
learned from Christchurch.
If there are many lessons learned from Christchurch,
it depends which side of it you're on,
but one of the more, more important ones is doing something
before is better than doing something afterwards.
And if you just look at the money involved, you know,
and see what's gone wrong in in Christchurch over time,
having done something
before would've been a much better approach.
Is there a way to create some kind of fund
that might help incentivize earlier work?
Like in other words, work
before the damage as opposed to everybody coming
with their hands up and asking for central money
and local money afterwards?
Just a thought. Um, in, in conclusion, really, you know, we,
we support the risk based, risk based
and proportionate approach.
It makes eminent sense.
We have a funny shaped building
as there are many funny shaped buildings.
They're not boxes. They have sharp, tall things
that do carry a risk.
And surely you'd go
after remediating those first, uh,
looks like the professional bodies, the architects
and the engineers in principle are supportive even though
the detail is not there.
But the legislation, as we've read, it seems to be silent
on a number of these matters, which would be very helpful
to guide us on our way through.
So that's Graham, unless you wanted to add anything,
but any questions, Andy and, and the others?
Okay. No, that's very helpful. Thank you.
We've got about, uh, just under four minutes left,
so, uh, any questions?
Hang. Thank you Mr. Chair. Um, thank you to, to you both.
So I, I take your point about the lower occupancy heritage
buildings posing a less risk perhaps, uh,
in your view than the higher occupancy buildings.
Um, so you, you're not asking for a,
there are not many cathedrals around in this country, right?
Correct. So you're not asking for a bespoke form
of consideration for the specific nature
of cathedrals throughout New Zealand? Well,
Um, maybe Graham's a subject matter expert,
although maybe he's more subject matter expert.
I'm the guy upstairs or lady upstairs.
I for sure am not a subject matter expert.
It just feels though, you know,
if you have commercial buildings that's three stories high,
full 40 hours a week, or an old people's home
or a school that's quite different to a church
or a cathedral, and that,
that's why we use the words the phrase episodic, um,
audiences or congregations, right?
So that you would say that the risk in the same area
of a building full of people most of the time compared
with our building, which is relatively little used, um,
the risk is different.
And that's part of the,
let's see if we can figure out a proportionate way to way
to deal with all this.
And I think the other side of it is, you know, these
buildings like cathedrals and they're not the only things.
Museums, uh, Nelson also has the School of Musical Arts,
which is also a historic building.
Um, these are buildings
of high cultural value in New Zealand being a
relatively, you know, young country.
We need these buildings.
Um, they're, they're part of, uh,
our, our our cultural and societal heritage.
Um, and it's important to be able to use them.
Um, and in our case, you know, a a 18
to $20 million strengthening bill, um, is a,
a significant hurdle
that is gonna take a significant period of time to get over.
Um, but we need to recognize the
importance of these buildings.
Thank you. I, I'll ask, uh, two quick questions.
Is 18 to 20 million, how far, um,
how far down the track are you?
So we have a resource consented now
that's zeroing ending the, um, end of its period.
So we're not Graham, we're not quite sure where it is,
but it looks like it's, it's a resource consent
to do two things, remediate the building under the existing
regulations, and also proceed with some enhancements.
Okay. But in terms of the fundraising, we,
We haven't started the formal
Fundraising. Right. Okay.
Um, and just another question.
So the, the table, the, the table we've got in terms of,
we've got this table here.
I don't know if you've seen it, but, um, it's got the, oh,
I use the bigger one, bigger version.
Um, it probably is the big version,
but it's, it's it's table.
It's like where I can pass down. Yes. I That one. Yeah. Yep.
So you're in an urban area.
Um, there's an interesting, interesting point there.
Very tall building, but
you're actually only one story
building. We're a one story building
Yes. With a pointy thing
At one end. Well, no,
it's a pointy thing there.
You might have to do something with a pointy thing.
Um, but, but if you're only one
story building, you might, you know.
Correct. I wonder if the
officials have thought that way through.
So we'll look, we'll get some advice on, on, uh, on
what you con what con churches like that constitute.
It's an interesting point because the definition there
of a one story building I would suggest is
slightly heard.
I mean, it's a one story building that probably sits in,
it's one story about 30 meters tall.
Exactly right. That's why Right. The point.
So, so it doesn't have multiple levels of floor.
It's one story if you, if you equate it to, you know,
a normal one story building, which might only be, you know,
four or five meters tall, um, it's,
it's a very different category of one
Story. That's why Ray, that's
why I raised the point.
I just wanna make sure my officials have,
uh, got their heads around that one.
Yeah, I'm sure that's not that hard to do that.
Look, um, we really appreciate it
and just wish you all the very, very best.
Um, it is a very important building, um, uh, in the beau,
the beautiful city of, of Nelson.
Thank you very much. Thank
You. Thank you very much.
Right.
Uh, we have oh, historic places. Welcome to publicity.
Nice to see you.
Right. We've got you here for 10 minutes. Yep.
Um, and, um, and Barbara, um,
and, um, you know, time's yours,
I'll give you a call about four minutes to go.
Okay. We've combined also with WCCT, the next submitter.
Right? Okay. Um, do you wanna take that
as 20 between the two of you?
Yeah. Okay. Right. Okay.
So I'll set the, set the clock for 20.
I'll give you a call when there's 10 gone.
Okay. Well look, thank you very much committee
for hearing us, and we don't take it for granted
that you will hear us
because we are not being heard on the planning bill
before the environment committee,
which is a huge concern to us.
I just make that point.
Parentally, we are an organization
of more than a hundred members.
We've existed for more than 10 years in Wellington, um,
focusing on historic places in Wellington.
And we have a lot of expertise in this area.
And let me say, I am so relieved to see you, Mr.
Chairman, um, chairing this committee
and, um, this incredibly important work, um,
amongst the sort of fog of war, I have to say,
this is a bright spot for us.
Um, we make a submission, pick it up, we make,
we make a submission, um, asking for, uh, a number
of, um, changes.
Um, but generally, let me say
that we are wholeheartedly behind you.
Um, and this initiative which we fully support,
um, mainly our requests relate to the threshold
of what is exempt
or what is, um, if you like, you know, the, the one
to two story, um,
unreinforced Masonry versus the three stories and higher.
So let me just say by way of introduction, um,
before I ask my colleague Barbara to talk, um,
the Wellington City Council has 15, owns 15, um,
heritage places, heritage buildings
that are earthquake prone.
More than half of those buildings
are small single story buildings.
So I'm talking about the squirrel monkey house in the zoo.
I'm talking about the tool shed at the botanical gardens.
I'm talking about the old historic
stables at the botanical gardens.
Now, currently, they're one story unreinforced masonry
that hardly anyone except monkeys and squirrels go into it.
This is an area where you,
you could slightly change the threshold
and Barbara will talk more about this.
Apparently under the way, the way the bill's drafted,
they would have to have their facade strengthened,
even though there's really zero risk to the public.
Now, I'm also president of the Oslo Historic Society.
Um, and this point is about buildings
that are not very often used.
We've got a very small museum near similar Crescent Station
in Kola, which is open for three hours a week.
We are lucky if five to 10 people come through
three hours a week.
But of course, it's a repository of the archives
of the western suburbs.
Um, an area that you used to represent Mr.
Chairman Northern suburb with that.
Anyway, um, you know, uh,
some years ago it was strengthened.
Um, it was also had the facade strengthened.
Um, and then again, it was declared earthquake prone.
Um, in the last few years now, the Society,
sly Historical Society paid for
and commissioned an independent
engineer to look at the building.
And, hey, Presto, it's no longer earthquake crime.
So I just tell you that story,
because this would be demolition by regulation.
It would force community groups into, you know,
demolishing perfectly good buildings
because of the regulatory imposition wrongly,
as it turned out, wrongly required.
So I just mentioned that as an example of a,
of the bad old days.
Um, currently I think that building would be
probably exempt under the bill
because it's single story
with the facade secured, um, concrete.
So the third, the third area, uh,
and we also will talk about churches in that regard as well.
Um, the third area of threshold that we'd like to change,
if you could, is, uh, three story buildings in in smaller
or regional areas.
So if you've got a small town in Martin
or Nui, um,
often the corner buildings will be three stories,
and we argue that three stories, um,
and below should be facade
or targeted strengthening ones not full retrofit.
So that's the threshold between the one two story.
Currently in the bill, one, two story facade only.
Um, we would extend that to a three story
in a smaller place, or even ideally in Wellington.
Anyway, I'll just come back to that.
But, um, here's my colleague, Barbara.
Thanks Felicity. Um, as others have said,
and we say we support this bill, we think it's, um,
it's going to help owners of not just heritage buildings,
many buildings, but particularly heritage buildings.
Um, the current requirements are onerous.
Uh, they don't address the, the highest risk.
Um, and they're particularly onerous for heritage buildings.
The requirements for earthquake strengthening, uh, compound
with currently requirements
to upgrade fire protection and access.
They combine with, um, plan consent requirements,
which I'll come to later.
High maintenance costs
and either in some places development pressures
where it's much cheaper to knock down the building
and stick up some something of glass and steel
or in areas where there's a lack of economic growth,
which would be a lot of our small towns, um,
where it's difficult to rent places out.
And once it gets an earthquake sticker on it,
it's even more difficult to rent
places out or get insurance.
Um, all of these things kind of, uh,
arrive together like a train crash
and make it attractive for the, the owner
of the building to do nothing.
And then we're down the track of demolition by neglect or us
and or all the other things that happen
to unattended heritage buildings.
A good heritage building is a building that's in use.
Um, many of the heritage buildings are,
are on the register currently are of low risk, uh,
for example, wooden buildings, uh, buildings north
of the bomb Bay hills, and it would be really good
to see those being now out of scope.
Um, and we'd like to suggest some further additions
to help heritage owners ensure that those buildings con
continue to contribute to our Townscapes.
Um, one thing we understand
that the 2017 methodology is being updated.
I couldn't find any, any reference on the interwebs two,
um, new proposals.
And it's difficult to submit on some
of the technical points without seeing that methodology.
So we'd hope that we get a chance to comment on
that and over to Felicity.
Yep. Just to reiterate the point, you know, we,
we believe three story buildings often contribute
to the townscape in many provincial towns.
Um, often they're prominent corner buildings, um,
and even for three story buildings,
it's primarily the facade that poses the risk
requiring the buildings to, uh,
have a full seismic upgrade could also result in abandonment
or, um, demotion by neglect.
Um, and a, a good example of this, of course,
was the Hydro hotel in Tim Maru demolished, um,
unfortunately, but three stories, uh, on a very sort
of prominent site where the facade could have been,
um, strengthened.
We propose that the requirement is for three story buildings
that the facade only be targeted for strengthening.
Coming to the point about churches
that the Nelson Cathedral folk made and your point, Mr.
Chairman, um, you know, it's great
that there's no definition of one story.
We'll see what we get. Maybe that's something
for the earthquake methodology people to look into
because, you know,
we had a discussion about whether it would be good
to have definitions or not.
Um, look, I I think it's a horses for courses issue, uh,
and certainly, um, there's different types
of one story buildings, which, which really, um,
need bespoke approaches.
Also, in this example, of course, a lot
of community halls which are not used very often.
Do you mean we've clearly coordinated this?
Um, I want
to talk about transitional provisions in unoccupied
buildings, which you've already heard about.
Um, as of July, 2021, which is unfortunately the last time
I, I had a chance to have a proper look at this.
Half of the territorial authorities had uploaded lists
of earthquake prone buildings to the register,
and about a quarter of those were heritage buildings.
Um, so what I've seen lately is that there are a lot
of buildings on the register that have not
yet been assessed, but they're on the register
and they have notices on the building.
So what what we would like to see is that buildings
that are no longer within scope are quickly
removed from the register.
And buildings that are not assessed yet
are either assessed or taken off.
So currently the default position seems to be,
if you haven't assessed it yet, it's earthquake prone,
which, and when you look at the pictures of some
of those buildings, um, this clearly is
improbable for some of them.
Um, and Felicity mentioned a couple of them
that are unoccupied, they're not adjacent to roads.
And, um, there should, there needs to be a way
that the council can say, look, that just would be silly.
Those are not quake pro.
Um, and, uh, yes, we'd like some,
some fast action from councils required of the bill.
Um, the other thing is, uh, the extension
of timing about 15 years is fine.
There was a special provision for category one
heritage buildings, and we would actually like to see one
of the conditions of, uh, granting an extension b,
that there were heritage considerations.
Um, also I want
to talk about the planning requirements
a bit more on the lack of funding.
You've heard about the lack of funding.
Um, the last time Heritage New Zealand reviewed plan
provisions for heritage was 20 21, 50 7%
of plans didn't make any specific, um, requirements
for earthquake strengthening.
And that means that, um, that would default
to a discretionary activity, um,
resource consent required possible notification and so on.
And you know what that costs, um, we would like to see
that the RMA be amended as a consequential amended amendment
and the planning bill.
So that seismic strengthening
of heritage buildings is at most a restricted discretionary
activity with the only matter
of discretion being the effects on heritage.
Um, and the facade strengthening via permitted activity,
subject to conditions around heritage values.
Uh, you've heard about funding already,
just some facts and figures.
Um, local authorities facing high cost.
Um, we see in Wellington, uh,
every day we see deferred maintenance issues going on.
Uh, there are prospects of rates capping, uh,
fewer providing heritage incentive funds for owners
and the any remaining funds are shrinking.
Heritage New Zealand has, uh, half a million dollars a year
to give out, up to a hundred K for successful candidates.
It's always oversubscribed.
Nobody ever gets that much money.
Um, so that's just really not helping.
But about eight minutes, eight minutes
left, eight minutes left.
Yep. Okay. Uh, that's not helping terribly many people.
Um, heritage Equip was, it helped 111 projects
between 2016 and 2022,
and we would like to see something like that restored.
That's not something you can probably put in the bill,
but just saying it would really help people over
Dity. Yeah.
Just in conclusion, um,
Barbara mentioned the Equip fund, which was run by Culture
and heritage for many years.
And it was a relatively small amount of money,
but it had a huge impact on, uh, owners
of heritage buildings.
It meant that when they were faced with, you know,
what do I do here, uh, this problem seems insurmountable.
It got them going on a process
of getting some engineering advice
and starting down the process of cost benefit analysis
for commercial use and so on.
So it was a real shame that that, um, fund was ended
by the previous government labor government.
Um, and we would like to see it back
because it was unbelievably, you know, the cost benefit of
that small amount of money was way,
the benefit was way outweighed by its cost.
It was a very good regulatory, um,
and it was run by, I don't know,
one or two guys or something.
It was very cheap to run here.
I would say that Heritage New Zealand is one of our best
operators in New Zealand for
cost benefit renovations of buildings.
Um, and where we are now in Parliament is very near old St.
Paul's. They took that building apart, you know, piece
by piece for just $3 million and put it back together again.
Earthquake strengthened and it's unbelievable.
So that organization has incredible skill at
operating on the smell of an oily rag
and doing a fantastic job.
And I just mentioned that
because Heritage has had a big hit over the Wellington Town
Hall, which is at the other end of the spectrum
where you have scope creep,
you have more than more than 100 changes to the
requests to the builders
and fixes of that building, uh,
including putting recording studios
underneath the base isolators and so on.
And a lot of that expense was not related to Heritage,
but Heritage was blamed for that big cost blowout.
So I would like to endorse, um,
the thinking within government about how
to strengthen Heritage New Zealand as a, a font
of expertise and perhaps of funding
or other mechanisms to help help property owners.
So thank you very much. Thank
You both right.
Go for questions. Yeah. Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Can I just pick up on the, um, comment you made about the,
what I perceive as the need for fast actions
around what's register held information, um, to give that,
that certainty that, that you're referring to.
So are you asking for something to be inserted in the bill
that would provide that requirement for the
information held on the register to be efficient, I guess?
Oh, to be reviewed, yes.
Yes. I think a, a timeframe when, where councils have
to actually review what they've put on there, which
Would be really helpful.
Okay. And you think having
that in the bill is the way it go?
I think so. Okay. Thanks. Other questions?
Well, I'm gonna ask one, so you've, you've seen this, um,
this table, um, which, um, has, uh,
you know, uh, inside, outside, um, urban centers,
different types of buildings, et cetera,
what it sounds like on quite a number of those things,
you know, things like squirrel monkey sheds and stables
and so, and, and, and your three story buildings and,
and other sort of, you like provincial service,
you're asking for more nuanced sort of, um, table.
Yes. Yeah, I think just a little bit of horses
and for courses because, uh, the table's great.
You know, if it's a question between the table
or nothing, let's go with the table.
But you could improve the table as well with a little bit
of nuance, as you say, over squirrel and monkey sheds
and three stories, um, where the facade secured.
So I mean, logically we would do
that if we did anything with it.
And it should be based on, I I'm gonna look, look
for my normal nods behind you,
but it should be based on risk to human life. Yes.
Yeah. We are not asking for a free,
for a free lunch for Heritage.
That's not what we're asking for.
We are, we, we fundamentally endorse the
risk-based approach.
Um, you know, our, our stories are really designed to,
to highlight the fact that the old, you know, NBS system,
you know, wasn't really kind of fit for purpose.
So moving to this risk-based approach is really
sensible, really sensible.
And maybe you build in a little bit of discretion
around some of these things, um,
that count councils could operate.
Um, the other question I wanted to ask you is, you said
Welling City Council own 15 earthquake pro buildings.
It used to be a heck of a lot more than
that been strengthened.
Um, one of the things which we've had, um, we had a bit
of discussion about that earlier in the day,
is the crown thinks it should exempt itself from a whole lot
of buildings being required to be strengthened
or being priority buildings, it should say,
and others being required
to be strengthened relatively quickly on the basis
that council has good asset, uh, sorry.
Um, government has good asset management plans now,
I think government's worse at that than, than councils are
by and large not picking on any particular council.
Does it seem reasonable that if government was
to be exempted, that councils should be exempted as well?
Yeah, I Think, or
alternately the government shouldn't be accepted.
Yeah, I, I don't particularly see, um, a rationale
for distinction in that regard.
Um, you know, among the 15 buildings that I said are,
are Council Wellington, city Council owned,
that are heritage buildings
that are currently earthquake prone, um, two
that greatly concern me of the Opera House, of course, um,
already being strengthened, um, not used, I mean,
still has a lot of people go there,
but infrequently, maybe once a week.
Um, and of course the Wellington Museum,
which also has been strengthened before and is base isolated
and is looking at, you know, another round of requirements.
Both of those are URM buildings
and they're both above three stories.
I suppose the Opera House would be three
stories 'cause it's got the tiered.
Yeah. Anyway, I think they would have
to do the full refit under your bill,
but it does greatly concern me the imposition
of cost on the community
for buildings sort of cultural significance.
But that may have a nuanced risk
or a, uh, you know, less of a timeframe in terms
of being used.
And I fully support, you know, absolutely the top risk
for rest homes, schools, hospitals, you know, you know,
big apartment buildings
that people are sleeping in these places
and they need to have special high protection.
But there are many other buildings that do not require that.
Um, look, we will just finish off with one other question,
which is, so I, I remember hearing from, um,
and we'll hear from 'em again today, um,
uh, in City Wellington.
Um, and they made the point that effectively some of,
because under the current model, um, if the MBS ratings
change, then a building, which was perfectly fine now,
no longer is, then they said, well, this is retrospective.
Um, I, I'm going to assume
that the buildings you're referring to,
particularly the ones that have already been strength at
once, at one point in time, that got 'em off the list.
In other words, they were no longer risk, um,
earthquake risk buildings, and then the legislation
or the regulations or the, the me the methodology changed.
Should we be doing this sort of double jeopardy
or even sometimes triple jeopardy approach to buildings?
Yeah. And I mentioned the Onslow Historic Society building
in Kle, you know, already strengthened facade,
already secured, not really a big risk.
The people that go in there are happy with that risk.
And yeah, I, I do agree within the city of Wellington
that this is demolition by regulation
and it's also regulatory takings from the property owners
to require them to put these enormous burdens on, um, them
that far outweigh, well, I would say far outweigh the risk
and certainly far outweigh their ability to pay.
And it is terribly stressful for some
of these people living in these, um, places
where I think they could, you know, they can make a,
an informed decision themselves among their body corporate,
that they're prepared to take that risk.
And if their facade is strengthened,
then they're not falling on members of the public.
And that should be kind of, you know,
buyer beware sort of. Yeah.
Some of that may be in the methodology.
So I would hope that the methodology,
the latest methodology doesn't just look at the,
the building, but looks at the risk factors involved
with the building more so than the previous one,
which was really about is the building going to fall down?
Well, if it's big enough, probably it will.
Um, but how many people will it damage?
Is it on a thoroughfare? I hope that's covered more.
Okay. Really appreciate it. Thank you very much. Thank you
All Very much indeed. Cool.
Thank you. Okay, uh, next up we have,
uh, atory resident associate.
I saw Alan Blake come in. Alan, nice to see you there.
And, and team. Alright, welcome.
Um, again, we've got your submission
so you can treat the submission as read.
Um, if you want to highlight elements of that, that's great.
Uh, and if you wanna lead
time for questions, that's great too.
I'll give you a call about four minutes to go,
but good time, your time is, uh,
it's yours and can start now.
So I'm Pito, I'm Ellen Blake
with the Mount Residence Association,
and this is another member
of the re association, Avil Bramley.
So I'm just going to, um,
briefly outline some general points
and then focus in on our key concern,
which is the multi owner buildings, apartment buildings.
Um, so overall the Mount That Residents Association supports
this legislation because it's, um, it's more targeted
to known and higher risk buildings.
So the proportionality
of risk has been addressed in that, in that way.
And obviously Wellington's, uh, high risk earthquake zone.
Um, we, uh,
would like to see that.
I think you're just talking about the double Jupiter,
that once people have done some work
to earthquake strengthen their buildings once that they,
that that's, that's as far as it goes.
It shouldn't be re-litigating with the next government
or the next set of regulations.
And it's particularly important for, um, homeowners.
So that's a few general points.
Um, we were talking about priority buildings earlier.
We definitely wonder why emergency buildings
and some of those, uh,
key infrastructure things like school are excluded from
what a priority building is.
Um, they're, they're some of the most important buildings
to make sure that they don't fall down in the earthquake
or that the strengthened as possible.
I'm also for the same kind of, uh, reason concerned
that the fire safety measures
and the all access to buildings measures have been, um,
removed because I would've thought they were very important
part of earthquake preparedness.
And another kind of general concern is that, as far
as I understand it, particularly for Wellington,
the council's already done this work once assessing
buildings, um, and how earthquake prone they are.
And that in this legislation, they're being asked to do
that again without any funding, um,
provided as far as I can see.
So that, that funding is, I would say is a requirement.
Um, oh, that the select committee should at least address
how councils will, um, deal with this, a additional, uh,
role that they've been given.
So as I was saying, a lot of, um, earthquake, uh,
prone buildings have already had a risk assessment.
And we've seen this in Wellington.
A lot of buildings have already been upgraded, um,
but some of them haven't.
So the buildings that have been upgraded, as far
as we can tell with a a more easily fixed low hanging fruit,
the more difficult buildings are still waiting to be done.
And that seems to revolve around, um, a lack of finance
to upgrade buildings.
So there, there gets to be a kind of, uh,
I dunno if you call it proportionality,
but it, uh, that,
that earthquake prone buildings are required to be upgraded
before any event where most natural hazard, um, issues, uh,
occur or a plan for in advance or,
but there's no requirement to upgrade until after an event.
So it seems like there's a real burden on earthquake, um,
risk buildings that isn't ap uh, applied equally
to all natural hazard buildings.
So that's one of the reasons that if, if we're going
to require people to upgrade to earthquake prone buildings,
there's a real public benefit for doing this
because it will reduce the risk after an earthquake.
That's, that's the plan.
So for that reason, we think it's really important
that somewhere in this legislation,
there's some requirements for help.
This all is gonna be funded.
There's a lot of, um, funding assistance
for other natural hazard work.
Um, just check my news.
So we are particularly interested in
how multi owner apartment blocks are going to be addressed.
These are not addressed in this, um, legislation
or in the policy work that's been done towards it.
Um, we are thinking about, we like in, there's a,
we have a lot of apartment buildings.
We've got a number that are on the
register as far as we can tell.
The ones that are on the register seem to have, have it be
of a more commercial nature.
So they've got one owner renting out many apartments.
But some of the issues that people have in apartment blocks,
um, are more like the multi owner apartments.
This is people's homes where they live,
as Felicity just said, this is
where they sleep for the night.
So there's a significant burden on people
and how they're going to, um, pay for this kind of work,
which isn't covered in this legislation.
So we'd really like to see that addressed in some manner.
Um, and we know that, uh, people always say, well,
where's the funding funding going to come from?
So Avril has got some ideas on
where you might find some funding
and how you might address it.
So you want to have a talk to that Avril, please.
Look, I realize this is not the thrust of the build.
If you get stuck with an earthquake designation
or for that matter, flooding or tsunami,
the single asset domestic homeowner suddenly suffers a
catastrophic loss of value and or can't get insurance.
And it's unrelated
to the remaining economic life of the building.
And the money is there
because we have around 2 million domestic homes.
And we do want to preserve the domestic housing stock,
I assume rather than let it be overrun by floods
and earthquakes and falling apart.
We pay about 4 billion roughly a year
to the insurance companies.
But increasingly they price risk,
but then they refuse to take it on.
It's not part of their social contract to continue to insure
buildings where there is a risk.
And worse, they're stealing away
because any property over success
of owners will pay a couple thousand dollars insurance a
year, take my own home, and 10 of my neighbors.
We've each paid a couple thousand dollars
over now a hundred years.
So collectively we've paid a lot of money.
We are not losing one in 10 of those houses.
The insurance companies have taken that money,
they put it into reserves, paid out a few claims, maybe
put it into salaries
and massive profits, then they to insure
and they take those reserves, the reinsurance,
and they steal away.
We might even suffer a catastrophic loss of a major insurer
with IX 70% of the market.
It could just pack up and walk away
and it would take all its reserves with us
and we'd be left sitting there looking pretty stupid.
So we got three minutes left. Yeah, pardon? Sorry.
Our ideas were,
So the money is there.
It could be redirected into a national levy fund
and it could be used to mitigate,
to start shifting buildings, to start repairing them.
It may need seed money from the government,
but ultimately there should be enough money there
to recycle, to protect the domestic housing stock on a much
more equitable basis than we are doing at the moment.
I think, I think one of the other ideas floating around is
that we could use GST on, um, insurance
and other payments that house homeowners make as a,
and put that into some kind of pull for remediation work.
We also run the risk of domestic homeowners
that are uninsured and no longer paying fire service levies
possibly, or even a natural hazards levies.
So that's throwing the burden back on other properties,
although they may still use the fire service. Mm-hmm.
So o overall we support the risk, the risk based approach
to this legislation, but it needs to include, um, homeowners
and multi-level apartment blocks. Thank you.
We do need to hold a government
Conversation. You're
on your own. Doesn't really cut it. Right. Thank you.
Right. Looking for questions, colleagues.
See if anybody's got any.
Well, I'll ask just, just the, um,
two, first of all, you said that, um,
and I'm very familiar with this, um, that the well
of council has done a lot of that assessment already.
Uh, I don't suppose, you know, how much of that assessment
of buildings will be able
to be transferred into understanding whether
buildings still fall fail off
and are still earthquake prone under the new legislation
as opposed to under the current legislation.
Sorry, Andy, have to ask the council
that it's, but beyond the,
But the officials behind me are listening.
So that's, that question is, I thought
that wouldn't be a fair one to ask you
multi owner buildings.
So, so just walk us through a little bit more
of your concern about multi owner buildings who are,
'cause we know that often they are struggling big time to,
um, to get the funds required
to be able to, to strengthen the
Building. I think, um,
I, I, I should have said at the beginning,
we really support the inner city Wellington, um, submission.
And Geraldine is very well qualified to talk about that.
So the multi owner building situation is,
it's not a apartment block that might be owned by one, um,
owner who charges a commercial rent for it
and should be, you know, making enough money
to maintain it properly and whatever else needs to happen.
So this is, these are buildings where people, um,
own own their own apartment.
That's their home. It may be their only asset.
And there's a whole range of issues about how to, how
to ensure it, whether you can insure those buildings.
And if you can't insure it, you can't borrow on it.
If you can't borrow on it, you can't, um,
do any kind of upgrades.
And some places in Mount F that we're aware of are, are in
that kind of situation.
Um, and,
and, uh, if you've ever lived in a multi
owner apartment block, you know, it's not a straightforward,
one person makes a decision.
It has to be everybody's making the decision
and taking the risk and, and maintaining these buildings.
Um, there's, there's a number of them around Vic, um,
who are in that situation.
So it's, it's a much more complicated, um,
situation to a one owner commercial enterprise.
And it's a really important thing to remember is
that these are people's homes they might not
have anywhere else to go to.
Okay. Well that's very, very much appreciated.
Thank you. Lovely to see you again.
Thank you. Okay.
Uh, now we're going to zoom and we're going to have who?
Mayor of So, and
again, she she's in the room.
Yep. Be there.
Lydia,
nice to see you back again.
Thanks, sir. Thank you for having me again.
It's been a long day for you guys, um,
and I acknowledge that
There's a few more to go yet.
Yeah, yeah. Um, do you,
you've got anybody there to support you on this one?
Uh, yeah, I should have Vanessa Mitchell online, our head
of, um, you there in a building?
Should be here. Yep, she's here. Got
Brilliant. Thank you. Okay. Right.
Okay.
We've got the, the 10 minutes and, um, time starts now.
Um, well yeah, thank you
for all the work that you're doing.
I know it's, um, it's a lot, uh,
to hear from a lot of people as well.
Uh, I think in this I'll store we, um, overview
and then I'll hand to Vanessa who will talk about, um, more
of the specific technical elements, um,
of this from our building side of the regulations.
Um, but just to give you a bit of an idea, Selwin's one
of New Zealand's fastest growing districts, as you know,
and we actually sit directly over the Greendale fault, um,
which initiated the Canterbury earthquake sequence.
So, um, we have been very much so part of, uh,
earthquakes in in the recent times.
Uh, we are a high seismic risk district
and, um, it's critical that councils retain tools to access,
uh, manage and mitigate, uh, local building risk.
We have a lot of older unreinforced masonry buildings
and that are as a key concern for a lot
of our towns and for our people.
Um, and we support the bill's continued targeted regulation,
uh, of these high risk structures.
I think the thing that's really important, um, from my point
of view is that clear national plain language communication
needs to be, um, essential.
And it needs to both explain the reclassification
because I think there's so much confusion
for people in our communities
and to support, um, consistent implementation across TAs,
uh, so that we are all dealing with the same,
um, same legislation.
Uh, so look and from a governance point of view, um,
we support the reform, um,
and support, uh, improving clarity, delivering targeted
and more affordable outcomes for our people on the ground
and protect our critical heritage and community assets
because a lot of those old buildings are, uh,
our heritage and assets.
Um, but we need to also, uh, mitigate risk as well.
So, uh, we have a good understanding of that.
And, um, I'll pass over to Vanessa
to talk about the technical elements of the submission.
Thanks me Olivia. Uh, so as Olivia has covered, cell
and district council is broadly
supportive of the bill's direction.
Uh, however we see the successful implementation is
dependent on ensuring that territorial authorities retain
sufficient tools, discretion,
and resourcing to manage, um,
local risk effective effectively.
The implementation timeframes are a key concern to us.
Um, there's a significant amount of reassessment work
that TAs would need to undertake,
and that's at the cost, uh, to our rate payers directly.
So it's really important that we're given, um,
appropriate time to make that happen, uh, as if we have
to bring in additional resource that's extra cost as well.
So the key points of our submission focus on, um,
the fact we support removing low risk buildings from, um,
the scheme and that allows the national effort
and investment to focus genuinely on high risk
regions like Canterbury.
We support the new model that tailors mitigation
to building types and seismic, um, zones,
avoiding disproportionate strengthening requirements
for lower risk structures.
And we support the removal
of the national Building Standard Rating system.
Uh, it's been widely misunderstood, uh,
and the clearer risk focused framework,
while improved public
and confidence, We support the extension
to 15 years, uh, where councils can grant extensions, uh,
recognizing that, you know,
real world economic constraints faced by small businesses
and heritage building owners, uh,
with high construction costs.
Um, and that allows us
to maintain safety while reducing hardship to our community.
We are concerned about the,
about the bill narrowing the pathway
for identifying new earthquake prone buildings
after the initial period, um,
particularly requiring MBS chief executive approval, uh,
that is seen to add unnecessary red tape and risks
and delaying action on buildings that present local risk.
And we ask the committee to retain
territorial authority discretion and,
and identifying at risk buildings within their districts.
In terms of the foreign accessibility upgrades, um,
foreign accessibility is an important part
of upgrading buildings.
However, we support the move to, um, make
that non-mandatory if it means the work
of strengthening buildings gets done.
And while we understand up
to 55% have currently lifted earthquake chrome buildings
may be reclassified.
Um, clear national communication is essential
to maintain public confidence in the safety of buildings
and the legitimacy of the regulatory system.
Territorial authorities already carry out significant
administration burden, um,
and the bill introduces new obligations without clarity on
any funding, and we think that must be addressed
to avoid further strain on local capacity.
So our recommendations to the committee are that, um,
we proceed with the move to a risk-based system.
We retain territorial authority discretion
to identify at-risk buildings, um,
by removing the MB approval requirement,
provide clear national guidance
and communication, including plain language tools for owners
and the public to understand,
monitor the impacts on community confidence, particularly
where buildings are declassified
and support funding pathways for small businesses
and heritage buildings where strengthening remains
necessary, and provide funding
or financial support to territorial authorities to implement
and reassess buildings under the revised system.
Uh, so that brings me to a close.
Uh, so one district council supports the overall approach
and I'm happy to take any questions at this time.
Thank you both very much. I'll just check
to see if there are questions.
We've got about four minutes left, Doug. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, thank you both again, your wish.
Good to see you again today.
Um, can I pick up on your submission point, uh,
about the requirement for MB chief executive approval
that you take issue with?
Um, I sort of take it that that's around trying
to avoid the need to slow things down.
The, the whole efficiency sort of frame.
If the bill or if the, the way in which
that approval was given was, um, within set timeframes,
um, would that mitigate some of the concern that you have
Potentially?
Um, I think it's just adding a layer of red tape
that doesn't need to be there.
If the methodology is clear
and, um, well-defined, then TAs should have the expertise
to make those decisions in their areas.
Okay, thank you. Um, question from me.
Um, this, you, you talked about the cost of having
to do reappraisals, um, which I'm conscious of how far,
two questions in that part.
One is how far down the track are you with, um,
doing the appraisals in the first place
and how many buildings are you having to assess?
Um, and secondly, how much of
that work do you think would still be able
to be validly used to ascertain
where the buildings were still earthquake prone under the
current or under the proposed ratio?
Sure. Um,
so currently Selwyn has 37 earthquake
prone buildings left on its list.
Uh, because we're a high seismic area,
we've done all of our assessments.
We originally issued approximately 58 notices, so being down
to 37 is quite good.
Uh, certainly reduces the workload.
It really comes down
to seeing the methodology when it's written, to know
how much work is involved.
Um, certainly the work that has been done to date
and is held on files will help inform those decisions.
Um, but until we see the finalized methodology,
it's hard to quantify.
Okay. So that really is something
for the government in terms of designing it and the,
and the, the, the more that, um, past work
that's been done to assess buildings, um, is able
to be used the better?
Yes. Yeah. Okay. No, that's, that's very helpful.
Thank you. Um, any other questions? Anyone?
Um, look, and there's just one other one.
We've had a couple of your, uh, one of your counselors, uh,
and um, one of your constituents also, um, talking
to us earlier today, uh, about a number
of your particularly churches, halls, sports clubs,
et cetera, in, in some of the smaller centers, uh, we
will be communicating back.
Um, but I understand that looking at the matrix
that we've got there, that they probably will all now
no longer be on your list.
So your, your 37 may well be considerably,
considerably reduced if that is the case.
Yeah, and I believe that, uh, um,
we received some correspondence, um, you know, stating
that there would be buildings removed, uh,
from the earthquake prone, um, building list.
But, um, actually what we didn't get was clarity of
what buildings they are.
Um, and so, you know, I find that particularly interesting
to be told that buildings will be coming off, uh,
the register, but not being told exactly
what buildings they are, um, actually leads to quite a bit
of confusion within our community as well.
And so, you know, we wanna be able
to have clear conversations with our community, um,
about those buildings.
And so, yeah, I think that's where some
of that confusion sits.
Um, and you know, I don't, I dunno if
that's entirely fair on our community with, uh, older parts.
Look, the, the officials are listening to this, so, um,
we will arrange whatever the appropriate communication is,
um, so that you are aware of the,
not necessarily which buildings,
but at least the type of buildings which are
stay on the list and type, which come off.
Good. Thank you. Cool. Thank you.
Lovely to see you again. Thank you
very much. Nice to see you
Again. Thank you.
Right. We have, uh, Dr. Brett Nakey via Zoom.
Brett. Brett, lovely to see you.
Yes, good to see you too. Um, thank you.
Um, we've got,
so we've got your submission so you can take that as red.
Unfortunately we've only got five minutes.
Um, as an individual, even though I know you have a great
deal of expertise in this area, um, I'll give you a call
with about three to go with, sorry,
with three down and two to go.
So, um, in your hands
to highlight anything you wanna highlight
and if you leave time for questions.
Yeah, we appreciate that.
Okay, thanks. A that and, you know,
and for the opportunity in general, um, just by way
of background, I completed a PhD in 2023
where I looked at the impact of the current legislation on,
um, heritage buildings, the private property owner,
and, uh, communities in general.
Um, and I concluded that the current legislation, uh,
had a lot of flaws and, and was causing, uh, and,
and had the potential to cause a lot of damage.
Um, so as a result, I'm, I'm very supportive of,
of the new legislation in general.
And, um, I can understand, uh, what's being done.
Um, the only thing I've got a concern about
or where I'd suggest a, a change is that, um, all buildings,
um, even the one of the two story buildings in small, um,
towns, uh, are required to at least carry out securing of,
um, parapets and facades.
Um, which should need a bit of a change to the, to the table
that's been alluded to, um, um, sympathetic
with why that exemption's proposed to be granted
and very aware of the potential problems
that might cause if, if my amendment was adopted.
Um, 'cause I did a lot of work on small towns such as, um,
why Matti and I know what the problems will be
by requiring potentially owners to momentarily
do the strengthening work.
Um, so I just make the point that, um, I'm suggesting this
with the proviso that some non-regulatory approaches
that also introduced offset the damage
that might be caused by this change.
Um, an example would be what was carried out in, um,
Wellington when they did their, um, facade program
after the Kaikora earthquakes where the costs were shared.
I think that was, um, a successful program.
Obviously it comes with some fiscal, um, demands, which
may be the, the issue I suppose.
Um, but I think that is very important.
Um, so as a minimum, um, I think,
and it's a bit of a theme that's come up
with other submitters of course, that there should be some
sort of support, uh, for owners financial support.
And as a minimum, I think that, um,
the tax law should be amended so that, um, any
strengthening costs, particularly around facade, um,
and parapets should become a tax deductible item similar
to repairs and maintenance rather than a capital item.
It would be a, I would think a comparatively easy, um, fix
in order to aid owners
and could be reference to particular areas
or particular types of buildings,
be it heritage buildings or whatever.
Um, so I guess I really wanna make the point that, um,
you know, the previous, I suppose weaknesses, um,
in legislation could have been alleviated by, um,
the use of non-regulatory approaches. Got
Two minutes left, Right?
I'm just worried the same mistake's gonna be made.
Um, you know, regulation alone's not going to
get the sort of seismic mitigation that we, uh, would like.
Um, so therefore I think we need that
or you know, that non-regulatory
or assistance to own as such as heritage equip,
which we've also heard about.
Um, the only other thing I would point I would make too is
that, um, the committee should also consider the impact of,
um, the other legislation, the Proposed Planning Act,
and particularly around the concept of regulatory takings.
Right. Okay. Questions.
Thank you. I have any questions I'm gonna ask you one.
Um, so your suggestion is that we put,
effectively we recommend putting all unreinforced masonry
buildings one to two stories regardless of location? That's
Correct. Effectively,
they are, are at the moment. Yeah.
Um, and then you then you say an out that, um,
they be exempt from remediation requirements able to prove,
prove that that's not economically viable.
I just wonder about the, um, the merit of that process.
'cause it seems like it could be very bureaucratic, uh,
and quite onerous process to go through
when it's quite clear.
And we've had a lot of advice over a long period of time
that a lot of those small towns,
in fact you mentioned why Matt as an example.
Yeah. Um, it's, you know,
they're probably not gonna be viable at all.
So what do we achieve by going through that process?
You might get one or two strengthened,
you might find a hundred, which can't be
because they're not economically viable.
Um, yeah, I suppose the problem being that how you try
and balance, you know, getting that safety thing
or the low hanging fruit in terms of the remediation,
but not being too severe on the, um, on the owners.
And I guess it's to avoid claims, for example,
for regulatory, um, takings.
Um, indeed.
Otherwise you might be in a, that bureaucratic situation
that there'll be some sort of, um,
litigation going on if you try and make it mandatory.
So there'd have to be some sort of assessment process.
It's not dissimilar to what some
of the rules have been written up
in some of the district plans.
And I think Wellington might be an example
where there some sort of feasibility study has
to be presented in terms of particularly
around heritage buildings.
That sounds like quite an potentially expensive process.
Anyway, I'll leave it there, Brent.
Really appreciate it. Thank you.
Right. Yeah, thanks. Thank you.
Okay, uh, now we have, uh, Dr. David Hopkins via Zoom,
another familiar name.
This, uh, this space.
David, are you there,
there?
Uh, yeah. Zoom down. Okay,
David, nice to see.
You're on, you're on mute at the moment.
Is that, uh, can you hear me now?
All good there. So David,
we've, we've got your submission.
Um, if you'd like to highlight, um, some key points.
I know you have plenty to add,
but, um, unfortunately we've only got you down for,
for five minutes, so, um, I'll, uh,
get the clock underway now.
I'll give you a call with two to go.
Understood. And thank you.
And my comments are pretty general, uh,
having been involved, uh, significantly since 1980,
in the 1980s, really in all this issues, these issues.
Um, in summary, I support the repeal
of a president earthquake pro buildings regime.
I do not support the proposed earthquake
pro building regime.
Uh, I advocate returning to the 2004
earthquake plane building regime.
Um, just to, just to note,
I've, I've been in, I was part of the people, one
of the people that people who, um, pushed
for legislation in 2004.
And then I be, became intimately involved with BIA
and DBH in implementing territory
with the territory authorities,
the earthquake pro buildings there.
Um, but the, to me,
the earthquake brain building in 2004,
that legislation required a policy from each ta, uh,
and they had to submit it and they had to consult on it.
Um, the amendments really in 2016 are the reason why
we're all here having to change the legislation.
And the fundamental things
that changed there was the technical criteria to,
to define an earthquake prone building.
Uh, it used to be that an earthquake prone building was one
that was likely to collapse in one third of the shaking
that you would do use to define a new building.
And in 2016, that second, that part was removed
and many, many more buildings were captured.
The second thing about this, um,
earthquake prone building legislation, which people seem to,
uh, be forgetting, is that it was brought in
to raise awareness of earthquake risk
and to let market forces drive, uh, earthquake strengthening
from there, uh, not to, not to punish.
And unfortunately in 2016,
so many more buildings were included.
It's not to say that we shouldn't,
it would be nice if we could fix 'em all, but we can't.
Uh, the proposed changes, I believe restore some sense,
but they play down earthquake risk and awareness
and they are unnecessarily complicated and confusing.
I would like to be able to tell someone in a pub
or somewhere that your building is earthquake prone if it's
likely to collapse in a one third earthquake.
I could not make a summary of that from what's proposed.
The com Canterbury earthquakes were a reminder
of the mayhem earthquakes can cause
and yet we seem to be in the process
of forgetting that already.
My my submission is to keep earthquake risks in mind.
Sensible legislation
and technical criteria should not require exemptions in
low seismicity areas.
New building standards take account
of variable seismicity across New Zealand.
And so percent NBS is in fact a risk-based process.
Um, that seems to be, uh,
not appreciated from some of the comments I've heard.
And also, sensible legislation
and technical criteria should not lead to exemptions
of certain building types.
The assessment of building performance,
which can be done readily these days, uh, uh,
identifies vulnerable buildings, whatever they're made of,
I'm very keen that the concept be kept simple.
So I say return, have a look at this, I, I I
return to see what was done in the 2004 legislation
and engineering settings, settings, which was likely
to collapse in 33%.
Code shaking, each TA had a policy.
Now, each TA did have a policy,
and the interesting thing was in those, in that time,
territorial authorities could actually have a policy
to do nothing technically,
but they were obliged to consult publicly on it.
As I'm sure you are aware, Mr. Chairman. Oh,
I'm, Um, uh,
and to me that was a, that was a, a very
beneficial part of that legislation in that
awareness of earthquake.
Earthquake risk was then in the minds of 70 groups of people
around the country not concentrated somewhere in Wellington.
Um, I'd be inclined to drop the percent NBS references,
although they are automatically risk-based.
So I don't understand,
I think in capable hands percent NBS is, is perfectly okay,
but maybe that should be kept for engineers only. We've
Only got another minute left, David.
Yeah, thank you. We should replace
with the quake star ratings Naugh to five stars.
I was thinking I was gonna have be able to share slides
with you, but I I can't,
but I, you, I'll, I've sent you through my, this, uh,
PowerPoint presentation of this
Oh, great.
To, to help. So to record that.
Um, and I think that's probably about all I need to say
or I want to say could say in the time. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. Are there any questions, colleagues?
David, is there anything in
the act which prevents councils having policies
around earthquake?
Um, prime buildings, which sort
of sits alongside of the,
the regulatory regime? I'm not sure that they would, uh,
I'm not really qualified.
I, I would say probably you could find a way,
but then the previous,
the previous regime actually was set up on
that basis mm-hmm.
In, in on the basis that it wasn't one size fits all.
And, um, this to me was a very good approach
where you've got central government
and local government working together, uh,
to address our earthquake risk, bring about awareness,
and over time reduce the risk.
Yeah. Okay. Look, I appreciate that, that thought.
So thank you very much.
Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Okay. Uh, we now have Councilor John ve, uh, via Zoom,
RA Koto, I, I'm presenting Council John.
Um, just, um, I've got,
we've got you down four, five minutes.
We have a, a very strong contingent from Selwyn, uh, today.
Um, uh, so, um, I'll give you a call with about two minutes
to go just in case, uh, there are questions
for you, but, uh, over to you.
No, look. Thank you. I'm here today on behalf of the
people in and Melbourne of the Selwyn District Council
that I've spoken to.
And they're generally in support of the bill.
It's important to note that there's a rural nature
and a small rating base.
So any solutions must be financially realistic.
And the main thing is stage risk reduction
that's proportionate to the real, actual,
not the perceived risk and affordable to avoid demolition
and loss of heritage.
The legislation must enable a practical pathway forward,
and I think it does that promotes public safety
and the exclusion
of the one two story buildings is a positive step forward.
So really what we're looking for,
and I'm sure the bill with some fine tuning
because it's really going
to be more in the detail than the principle is
it's risk focused, it's flexible,
economically sustainable,
and it prioritizes public safety.
Thank you. Any questions?
That was very quick. Did not get anywhere near the, the,
my, uh, uh, two minutes
to go, uh, any questions, colleagues?
So John, can I just check, are you, um,
'cause you are I think the fourth person now from Selwyn,
uh, including your mayor
and one of your colleagues, uh, to make submissions today.
Um, they seemed unclear as
to which buildings would no longer
be considered Earthquake Pro.
We understand from, uh, me, Lydia, that there's, uh, 37
buildings you've currently got on your earthquake list.
Uh, but they were unclear as to
how many will come off the list under
the, the proposed model.
Are you, are you clear
that you understand which ones, how many will come off?
And you probably have buildings in mind, I would imagine,
I suppose on governance, not, not, um, council, so,
so I need to be clear that it's not my, um, role to, to sort
of be across that amount of detail.
But talking about TA
and Melbourne, which is the, the, the largest,
um, ward in the district.
It's mainly rural, semi rural.
And I would, I don't recall a three story building in there,
but I think it's the local churches, the halls.
And, and also an important thing is that,
and I know it's not directly related to, um, the bill,
but the consequences of insurance companies saying, well,
look, we are not going to accept,
and I know they make their own commercial decision,
but looking at those factors, so, sorry Mr.
Chair, I'm not able to be specific.
Uh, I look, I think you probably, um, say you're onto it
because it's those kind of buildings,
which are the ones which are likely to come off the list
and that's, that's what the officials
in the back of the room are, are.
So, yeah. That's cool.
Um, I don't have any other questions I ask. Thank you Mr.
Chair. Um, thank you John.
Um, I think your answer might be consistent
with your colleagues from Selwyn,
but I'm gonna ask you anyway.
Um, the suggestion here that the chief executive
of MB shouldn't be involved in the approval process, that
that sort of knowledge is best placed in the
local, at the local level.
If there were timeframes
or restrictions to ensure
that decision making was made quickly in terms of
that approval process, would that mitigate some
of the concerns that you have about it?
From the discussions I've had
with those in to or Melbourne?
No, because it's really that MBS a, um,
has a role, but I'm not too sure that it has a role
that if we're going to say
that the territorial authority is the most appropriate,
I think we then need to make sure that they're resourced
and able to fulfill that role.
And putting in that the requirement for, you know,
another government department to come in,
I think is not the best use of resources moving forward.
Thanks John. John, thank you. Really appreciate it.
Thank you for your time. Thank you. Okay.
Uh, next up we have Dr. Richard Sharp.
Dr. Sharp, nice to see you.
Good afternoon. I submit from a perspective
of more than 55 years in earthquake engineering began
with the Anang earthquake in 1968.
Ended up with me being the technical director
of earthquake engineering with Becca here in Wellington,
to postgraduate studies developing software simulate
buildings, damaged earthquakes,
undertook many projects from seeding earthquake loads from
the Maui platforms, supporting the earthquake, uh,
rural commission and consulting internationally
and countries including Nepal, Romania, Turkey, Cyprus,
India, the Netherlands, and the Pacific Arts.
I got three points to make.
Firstly, I support the revis revisiting of earthquake, uh,
prime regulations at this time
because of the difficulty
of many in meeting the current requirements
for strengthening or demolishing buildings, the level
of resilience, the new building standard is we currently
design for is completely arbitrary in origin and
therefore, so is the 34% cutoff for earthquake brownness.
A couple of Americans in the 1970s, um, postulated that, uh,
10% probability
of the design load being exceeded in 50 years was a
reasonable level and the world's followed it.
The origin of the one third factor was a reasonable hunch
of the learned committee, that it represented an increase in
risk of about 10 times that of a new building
and that a ratio greater than that would be unacceptable
to society.
There's no reliable way of equating this
to the annual road death toll.
No structural engineer will tell you that a building is safe
for society to say whether it's safe enough.
Secondly, second point, I do not support the removal
of Auckland and, uh, those
hazard areas from the coverage of the regulations.
It's a widespread confusion and miscommunication rehad
and the risk arising from the hazard.
And we've heard that in recent submissions,
earthquake hazard can be mitigated by design so
that the risk is low at the heart of the size.
All seismic design in the last 50 years is the intent
that life safety risk be the same across the whole country,
even though we know that statistically the hazard varies
from region to region, suburb to suburb
'cause of the varying softness of the ground.
And that's what my friend David Hopkins was saying before.
Therefore, for new buildings
and for the assessment of existing buildings,
the life safety risk in Auckland is the
same as that in Wellington.
Have you add consequence then to the risk, the consequences
of a major earthquake in Auckland with its prominence in
New Zealand's economy reinforces the argument
that Auckland should not be removed from the coverage
of earthquake praying legislation.
And as I said, you'll notice that some of the submissions
and briefing papers mix up hazard with risk.
For example, the references to
seismic signs are about hazard not risk.
As for risk targeted measures being promised, a number
of my colleagues don't know what this means.
And AWAI clarification of these in a general sense,
everything we do in seismic resilience is risk targeted.
You might remind yourself that the original purpose
of the existing Earthquake Pro regulations was to identify
and address the worst of the worst of our structures, not
to mitigate the risk from a majority
of buildings in the event of a large, uh,
Christchurch sized earthquake.
The proposed regulations do not improve overall safety in
earthquakes, but it's surely the prerogative of society
to decide whether to pay now or pay later.
Thirdly, I oppose the removal of a require
to display at a building's entrance
that a particular building is below the level
of seismic resilience deemed by society to be acceptable.
I want to be informed so that I can make my own decision as
to whether I want to enter the building or stay long in it.
And the precedence for this is the government's right car
website, which promises to answer the question,
how safe is your vehicle?
Thanks for the opportunity to present.
Okay. Questions? Good? Go. Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Can I pick up on the comment that you, um, don't agree
that Auckland should be effectively exempt?
Does that extend to the other two areas of Northland
and the Chatham Islands?
Uh, yes. Principle that's, um, uh, perceived that it's,
uh, uh, a low hazard, um,
'cause it's a low hazard doesn't mean it's a low risk.
As I was, uh, going to say the
the design levels are much lower in those places.
The risk in general terms is about the same. Thank
You. Thanks.
So if I use the MBS,
which I know you just said was completely arbitrary, what,
what I understood was that, um,
that in Wellington you had a much higher, um, portion
or much higher percentage than you did in Auckland.
Um, you are required to strengthen to,
so a building in Auckland to reach the,
the 34% would be much weaker than a building in Wellington.
That's correct. Yeah. Um, so it is what you're arguing
that building stock in Auckland by
and large is considerably weaker than it is in Wellington
or Christchurch, for example.
It's a risk-based approach to, uh, not demand
to have design loads
or assessments, um, out of proportion with the hazard.
So, so have we basically got, um, constructed a regime
that said you are in a high hazard area, you will, um,
strengthen your building to reflect
that high hazard area? That's
Correct. Yes.
You are in a low hazard area
where you design your building to reflect the low hazard
and now we're proposing to take the biggest low hazard area
out of, right.
That's, that's useful to understand.
Um, and secondly, you, you, um, made the point about, um,
uh, not removing the requirement
to put EQ notice EQP notices on, um, uh, on buildings,
which we have had a bit of discussion about.
Let's see, the official smiling.
Um, and I asked the question about, well,
when you go shopping you don't usually go go up
and go on to look at a website for each shop you go into
to see whether it's a building safe or not.
It's much easier to have it on the, on the, um,
on the building, which is slightly different than if you're
buy, looking to buy a car than you
probably are looking online.
I would suspect. So probably both regimes work, don't they?
One an online regime.
You're not suggesting an online
regime here, you're suggesting
Invisible. That's not necessarily
No. The principle.
Yeah. No, I appreciate that. Look, thank you Richard.
We really appreciate your, uh, your expertise. Thank you.
Thank you. Right.
Okay. That takes us to inner city Wellington
who are here in person.
Oh, there you. Nice to see you.
Right. Welcome Geraldine.
You've come up and dispatch us several times today already.
Yeah. All good. Yes.
Um, so, uh, look, we've got you down for 10 minutes.
Um, I will give you a call with about four minutes
to go if you want to leave some time for questions, right?
We've got your submission, which you can take as read,
but if you wanna highlight any bits then do that
and then, um, hopefully
there'll be some questions for you as well.
So in your
Hands, Koto, thanks for, um, the opportunity
to have a say here.
Um, in city Wellington as a residents association,
we've long lobby for a review of the current legislation
and we support the proposed changes too in the direction
of the, um, earthquake prone building system.
Substantive changes are needed
as the current system is unsustainable.
A targeted, pragmatic and proportionate system is required.
The proposed changes deliver benefits
to many owners across New Zealand, which is great
for those owners in New Zealand Inc.
But apartment owners and multi-unit residential buildings
continue to be the largest group who will face uneconomic
and unaffordable compliance costs.
And Wellington apartment owners are the largest group
of apartment owners that to face these.
And the, it states that the apartment owners will have no
or little cost reductions compared
to the cost they face under the current system
and will continue to be at risk of being, of not being able
to comply after spending years
and thousands of dollars already trying to comply, many
of whom have been trapped in the system for 17 years.
The review review report states this very clearly,
but the regulatory impact statement failed
to identify the impacts
of compliance on the different groups of regulated parties.
IE the different building owners.
It treats all building owners the same when they are not
private owner apartment owners,
mostly owner occupiers are clearly different commercial
owners to crown owners and to local government owners.
They fund from tax paid income, they actually pay the GST
and their full personal liability for the costs
of any any increases and risks.
They're in multi owner environments making decisions in a
complex structure with diverse owners
about their most important asset, their home.
This negligence continues past flawed processes despite now
having a ministry for regulation.
They're supposed to provide oversight
to avoid disproportionate compliance burdens
on regulated parties.
And I note read Markey's comment about the committee needing
to consider the concept of regulatory takings
'cause this is really relevant for apartment owners.
The fundamental problem is
that the government has not developed a funding
implementation model that would support
and enable compliance by this group of owners.
And that applies for this process for the 2016 process
and the 2004 process
when the review identified department owners at
as most at risk of not being able to comply.
And when the research commissioned by MB said, um,
that effective funding mechanisms are a key feature
of successful seismic risk mitigation programs,
the current situation of no financial implementation support
will result in legislation being passed.
And knowing that this subgroup of re regulated parties
homeowners with only that one asset
for many will not be able to comply
and will face disproportionate compliance impacts
compared to other building owners.
The key question now is
how can these residential buildings be remediated?
It's not how can these apartment owners be coerced into
uneconomic and unaffordable decisions
that creates financial insecurity
and housing insecurity For many of them,
the select committee must require a funding
and implement implementation model to be developed
before this legislation is passed and comes into force.
So, um, if I take any questions you've got now
before, above like a chance,
I've got some wrap up comments to make as well. Oh, okay.
Right. Okay. Questions that college, I
Don't know how long that took
Actually. Thank you. In
terms of that funding model, how,
like you're saying that that needs to happen
before the legislation is passed.
Yeah. So how do you see that in a, in a call for efficiency
and and wish wishing to address this issue?
How do you see that sort of working in with
the ability for the bill to proceed?
Well, there has to be, um, some sort of, sort
of like the loan scheme has to be reinstated.
There has to be recognition
that these owners are paying 15% GST
and all the other taxes that are incurred
and these um, um, projects.
And whereas commercial owners can actually get
that GST back, you know, so we are,
these owners are paying these money, this money.
The, it, it comes down to the fact that,
um, there's a lot of public safety here.
These owners don't have any choice in the matter.
There are owners
that can comply within a multi owner environment,
but there'd be some owners that can't comply,
they cannot get the money, they're retired,
they have no income, they have limited savings.
So somebody has to be able to provide
that funding to make it happen.
But there are some examples that are uneconomic.
You know, the example of t store is frequently mentioned
and is in the case in the review report,
$10 million to strengthen that building.
And that's an old price.
Now whether that makes,
whether there any proposed methodology will make a
substantive difference to that cost is still unknown.
But, you know, we, these,
these burdens being placed on these owners without
this work being done.
And in our submission we have put forth some ideas around,
around that, that sort of graduated process.
But there has to be some recognition
that these are homeowners
and no other homeowner is required
to bear these sort of compliance costs.
You good? Any other questions, colleagues?
Um, Geraldine, can I just ask um, one,
um, one area of questions.
You are, you, you, I think you said you want the loan
scheme, um, uh, reinstated
It ha i it ha you know, as, as a package
of funding options. Okay. Because so,
So when I, I mean call this, is this on a grant, um,
Robertson set up, um,
but I recall I think one building,
apartment building was getting close to um,
getting something across the line after several years.
Yeah. And nobody else had,
because the kind of, the model didn't quite work.
Could you tell us what was going on there
and if, if you were gonna do it differently,
what we do differently?
Well, I think they were in the setup,
there was a number of issues with it.
And that some of the owners that needed the money
couldn't apply because, um,
they had become reluctant landlords 'cause they had to sell
and move on, but they couldn't sell their house.
So they were renting it out.
But under the loan scheme criteria, you
Had to live There, you had to live there.
Um, there was sort of,
insurance is an issue under that known scheme.
They're requiring evidence of being able
to get full replacement value insurance.
Um, and I, insurers won't do that.
Um, and I think there was also issues with, you know, the,
the, um, there was a percentage
of the interest was being charged on top of the
interest rate because these, uh,
owners were considered high risk.
So there were a number of issues with that loan scheme
and that after a year it was reviewed
and substantive changes were made.
One of which included the fact that owners
who were already getting the accommodation supplement,
supplement could continue to get that supplement
if they took out a loan, whereas in the original thing
that was going to be stopped.
So it takes a long time to get to that point.
And I think also what changed was made,
they had two tier approval system so that, um,
so that, you know, you guess approval
and principle that you would be eligible for a loan.
'cause these decisions
and these processes don't happen in a matter of months
for this type of ownership model.
So, you know, I think that building that, that they,
they had a building consent.
The only reason they started to go
and do that, like investigate seriously was
because this loan scheme was there
and four owners needed that money.
So, you know, I think, but I think that the loan scheme,
and I think there still has to be money coming from tax
because we're paying GST
and no one else is, frankly, they're all getting it back.
They're a commercial owner.
So it's gotta be, it's gotta be a number
of different approaches that have to be looked at.
But fundamentally, somebody has to be able to say,
should anyone be making these, being forced
to make these uneconomic decisions
to avoid being taken to court
and faced with a $1.5 million fine.
And then having the councils take over your building
and remediate it and then try and get the money back.
You know, you know, that that whole enforcement regime
isn't, isn't the way to help these people progress.
You know? And but,
but these, um, the costs are, are significant.
You know, if you had a choice, you wouldn't do it.
Um, and finally for me, um, you accept that the buildings
you accept, the building, uh, assessments
that have been done, they are that you think the work needs
to be done, it's just a really matter of how it gets done
and how it gets paid for.
Is that really the key in the timeframes?
Well, I think, I mean, I agree with the approach,
you know, the targeted approach.
Um, the,
but we don't know how much work these buildings, none
of the owners know exactly what they're gonna be up for.
I mean, under concrete buildings, they're saying an average
of 20%, um, reduction for a targeted retrofit.
But that's because they've included buildings
that will be pulled outta the system.
So it'll be a no cost.
And so there's that 20% is likely to be much higher.
So no one really knows what's gonna be required.
If there's substantive reduction in costs, then owners will,
owners are already progressing and doing it.
They're not waiting for the outcome of this.
I know have several buildings that are,
are up there where that's the case.
Owners are trapped, they wanna get out of this,
and they can't be left on their own to,
to find a way through it.
You know, there's, there's not that many buildings,
but there are a lot of owners affected.
Yeah. Oh, look, thank you for that.
We'll, we'll get, again, we'll get some advice on
what the difference it makes in terms of the cost
of doing work on buildings that you're affected.
So, Geraldine, thank you voice. Thank you. Okay.
Next up we have Matthew Plummer.
Matthew, nice to see you as well.
Feels like I'm Becca Wellington today.
Thank you. Good to see you.
Um, thank you for this opportunity to come and talk.
Um, uh, firstly, this has, this has been an issue
that's been front of mind for me through my employment with,
uh, Becca, and serving as an elected committee member
for Property Council of New Zealand's Wellington Branch.
Um, I would like to state
that this submission is very much my personal views, um,
and I'm intending it to be apolitical.
Um, overall I support the bill.
Uh, I focused on areas where I think the draft legislation
could simplify administration and finesse risk settings.
Um, I'll give you a brief, uh, summary
of my submission then, and they'll be open to questions.
Um, so firstly, uh,
the draft legislation identifies urban centers as
what statistics New Zealand calls metropolitan large
and medium regional centers.
Uh, these cover huge amounts of rural area
and satellite settlements Under the 10,000, uh,
person headcount, um,
I propose the legislation defines urban centers
as the urban core, as subset classification
of the metropolitan large and regional centers.
Um, so the Mano two, for example, uh, this, uh,
the urban core covers places like Palmerston North
and Fielding, uh,
but excludes satellite areas, uh, which, uh,
satellite urban areas like Hurst
and rural Hint land classification, which, uh,
covers place like Sanson, uh, went to be, um, uh,
uh, macro be excluded, for example.
That's, that's hint land. A significant urban growth will be
captured by stats reclassification.
Of course, the legislation could be
worded to accommodate that.
So, second point, uh, the bill requires a building exempted
by, uh, from retrofit, by its territorial authority
to have a postal notice informing the public of this.
Um, this seems really mad, uh,
given the territorial authority would've considered the risk
settings and granted the exemption, uh,
and that more broadly, uh, smaller across the country,
smaller vulnerable buildings are not required
to have public notices.
Um, so the, I think the earthquake pro
and register is appropriate place to capture exemptions
and not have, uh, posters just reduces the administration.
Thirdly, and this is the thing actually
that prompted me to submit in the first place.
Um, at the weekends, I walked the
dog out at Watts Peninsula.
Uh, this is, uh, in the Miramar part of, uh,
Wellington Sea got this large, uh,
wonderful urban park area.
There's a range of old gun
and placements, uh, lots of World War ii, uh, uh,
single story brick structures.
Um, these all have earthquake prone notices on them, uh,
but they're set five meters back from the track
that runs up from Shelly Bay.
Uh, the track's locked off to vehicles
and there'd be probably a dozen people
an hour walking up it.
Um, being of course being in Wellington, uh,
the draft legislation would require them
to have their facade secured within the timeframe across,
uh, urban parts of the country.
There'll be dozens of similar
structures in similar settings.
Um, uh, vulnerable, potentially heritage value, uh,
not economically viable to retrofit
or unlikely to be a viable to retrofit,
but costly demo to demolish.
And in the scheme of things, very low risk.
So I propose earthquake prone buildings in public open
spaces in urban centers should be treated
as if they were in a small town.
If the distance between the earthquake prone building
and the closest thoroughfare is further than the vulnerable
co components of the structure is high,
simple, uh, rule there.
Uh, this would allow the WATS buildings, for example,
to be simply sit on the register
and not consume administrative time from Wellington City
Council, uh, and Heritage New Zealand and others, uh,
and also construction engineering resources.
Um, thank you. Open to any questions.
Thank you very much. Um, questions time?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon, Matthew.
Um, I'm interested in your suggestions about consolidating
some of these definitions
and concern that stats New Zealand if they change something
that it's gonna upend or the decisions made about risk.
Um, are you familiar with, uh, tier one
and tier two urban areas term commonly used, uh,
in the RMA to describe tier one centers being Auckland,
Wellington, Christchurch, Hamilton,
and Taronga Tier two, the next level of towns?
Do you think it'd be helpful to actually have some
consistency of what these areas are called
across legislation?
Uh, thank you Mr. Court. So this was a bit of a deep dive
for me into stats classifications.
Um, I, I think I was going with the definitions
of the functional urban centers
that was used in the legislation.
And, uh, in my submission, I've actually gone around some
of the Auckland areas, I thought, just to paint picture
for the, um, Auckland based mps.
But, um, I think if you look at the urban common mean,
these are all well defined by stats.
Um, I mean, the urban core area,
they're pretty clearly marked out.
Um, it's when you start thinking about ASHE
as being a satellite urban area, well,
the term satellite urban area
to me might suggest a big suburb in a city,
but it's, I think ashes population is
1500 or so, if I'm right.
Um, so it, look, it's,
it's probably just pointing out there's a,
there's an inaccuracy in the way things are defined and,
and you could actually carve out a lot of buildings
that are not, that the risk settings that you would, uh,
assume they're at, given the way
that the legislation's currently framed up.
Okay. Helpful. Thank you.
Uh, Matthew, um, just, uh, one question.
So just in terms of those, the, again, those urban areas,
um, we've had 10,000 being the,
the number which has been said that captures the places,
like you said, fielding, for example.
I know that the economics of some
of those areas are strained at very best.
Do you think we need to have another look at whether
that 10,000 is a logical, a logical, um, cutoff number
or whether something some other way
of doing it might work better? Uh,
Look, that's not my confidence to say,
but you've gotta draw the line somewhere.
As a member of the public, that sounds about reasonable.
Um, but you, yes, it's not in my competence to say, I think
that the MB team and the supporting consultants,
which Rebecca is one of 'em, has done a lot of work on that.
Well, deflected, thank you. Nice to see you.
Thank you Ing. Thank you. Okay.
Um, we have, uh, Debbie Port in person.
Debbie, nice to see you. Nice. See you again too. Yeah.
Well, um, now I'm gonna read something
that was in an article
Last I'll give, I'll tell you, I'll give you,
give you a call again with, uh, about two minutes to go.
Yep. Cool. Um, so, but you've got five minutes
and that starts now.
So as you know, I live in social housing,
the council social housing, uh, rented by, um, I rent from
Han now.
Um, the thing about the council's properties, they had the,
um, properties all assessed back in 2024,
and it's come out, six of the properties have to be redone.
And I live in one of those buildings.
And, um, how did the building Berkeley Dard go from 70%
of the building code to 30% a space of 10 years?
That's because, and I suspect the work was not done
properly, um, because the top two floors
where the problem is, it's the walls and there was nine
and 10, um,
those floors were mostly removed and reconstructed.
And I question whether the same level
of earthquake strengthening was put into the left, the rest
of the building into the top, those top two floors.
I question whether it was done properly.
Um, now this is what the council,
somebody on the council said last year,
the average cost per unit would be 374,000
and 133,000 per bed council.
Tim Brown said the government's money had paid
for the easier work, but costs had now risen.
Other than that, the, uh, the cost
to the rate pass nest issue was the cost.
Tenants rents would rise to reflect the upgrades.
How is that fear? How is that fear that the tenants
who can't afford the rents now are gonna be footing this
bill when it turns out it might be that the company
who did the work did not do it properly in the first place.
And so I wonder if there's gonna be legislation in the, um,
in anything in legislation for legal recourse,
for building owners that discover the work wasn't
done properly in the first place.
'cause I said a building doesn't go from 70%
of the building code to 30% of the space
of tenures for no reason.
And I think the standards changed and exposed us.
Um, tenants are wondering, you know,
what's gonna happen to them?
Um, 42 units, as far as I'm aware,
are gonna have to be relocated.
If that work goes ahead, the rest can probably stay put.
Um, so is it fair that these tenants are gonna,
that transferred from council to ta mahana are having
to put the bill in the form of huge rent to increases,
which they cannot afford?
So I wanna know what the government are gonna do about this.
It's not fair. I'm one of those tenants who start,
still can't get access to the proper funding.
Um, the income and rent subsidy, which can solve this, um,
it would certainly solve this.
So I wanna know what the government are gonna do.
Is it fair that tenants are gonna have to,
um, foot this bill
Finish you? I have questions,
Yes. Cool. Yeah.
Are there any questions? Um, I'll ask you one, Debbie,
you, you, assuming that the, um, change in the
property, so property was strengthened 10 years or so ago.
Yep. Um, and then, um, reassessed again. Yep.
We're assuming that's because somebody didn't do work.
What happens if the rules of the game had changed?
And of course, what we're doing proposing here is
that the rules of the game have changed again,
but possibly more in the opposite direction.
Um, but we have a lot of buildings around the country
where exactly that has happened.
Mm. Not necessarily 'cause anyone's done anything wrong in
terms of what work they've done.
Mm. But 'cause the rules of the game
and are getting nods from behind me,
the rules of the game changed.
Yeah. But the thing about Hanson court, right, a lot
of money was sunk into the BB block.
Right? And that doesn't have to be done,
but the other buildings do.
So I question whether the work was done properly
because, um, the rest of the building at Berkeley was,
um, strengthened properly.
Right? That's fine.
But it's those two top floors which were mostly
removed and reconstructed.
So I question whether the work was actually done properly in
the first place because there's no insulation on the outer
walls of the building if that was paid for
and expected it wasn't supplied.
So I do question whether the work was
done properly in the first place.
It's quite concerning that 10 years later they're having
to sum up more money.
This was taxpayer money that was funded to,
to fund the upgrade in the first place.
Debbie, look, thank you for that.
Um, yeah, we've got about a minute left.
But, um, all I'd say is that often it's not
because somebody's done something wrong.
Yeah. It's because the rules have changed.
The earthquake rules have changed,
and we've had buildings all around this place
where the co the, you know, they were 80% one day
and the next day they were 15. Um, and
Well, it's good to look at this very closely
because something doesn't seem right with us.
That's why we're doing what we're doing.
Yeah. But please think about these tenants.
I mean, they, they shouldn't have to foot the bill for this
'cause it's now been incorporated into the, um,
into the upgrade program.
That's six properties
and tenants are gonna be paying higher rents to pay for it.
That's not fair. So I wanna know
what the government are gonna do for tenants that didn't,
can't get access to that funding. Debbie,
All, all I'd say is that this process will lead to, um,
re reviewing of all those earthquake prone notices.
Um, and some of them, many of them will come off that list.
Okay. So we'll see what happens. Yeah. Cool. Thank you.
Right. Okay.
Next we have Central Otago District Council via Zoom.
Right. Do we have Central Otago there?
I should be coming through.
Yeah.
Hello? Hi, there can hear us.
Hello. Right. Welcome. Hi here. Okay.
Um, a Alex and friends.
Hi there. Nice, Nice
to see you from beautiful central algo.
Absolutely. You can take your submission as read, um,
but we've got you down for 10 minutes.
If you want to highlight any
key points, then please do that.
Uh, and if you can leave us so three
or four minutes for questions, that'd be great.
I'll let you know when there's four minutes to go.
So time, your, your time is yours.
Thank you. And, uh, thank you very much
for hearing our submission.
Uh, I'm Tracy Patterson. I'm the acting mayor at the moment.
Our mayor is, um, away on a family holiday,
so you've got me instead.
Um, and to my left, what could be your right, uh,
you've got David Koons, who is the group manager, uh,
for community experience,
and we've also got Alex Crosby who is the policy
and strategy lead.
Um, I guess the big thing for us is
that we are really in support of this.
And, uh, this, for all of our towns,
we are all under 10,000 people.
So we are designated rural.
So we have, um,
we have 15 earthquake prone buildings.
We are proposing to keep 11 of them.
And that's obviously through
consultation with our community.
Um, in our 25 37 LTP,
their budget is $8.6 million.
That's, uh, that's spread across those 11 buildings.
Um, and I think like a lot of councils at the moment,
we're working really hard to reduce our costs,
and in particular, the rates impact on our constituents.
So as it stands that $8.6 million
represents a 14.33% rates increase,
which is quite untenable for a lot of people.
Um, I guess the big thing from a community perspective, uh,
the rural isolation, you know,
we have 10,000 square kilometers down here
in the bottom of the south.
And it actually, I guess the best way
to think about it is these buildings,
they represent a lot more than just, uh, just a building.
So what they have is you have your christening,
you have your 21st, you have your wedding,
and then inevitably you have your funeral.
So these have a massive amount of, you know, community,
heart, community spirit,
and it's a really important thing
for these communities. Pass over to
David. Yeah, thanks Tracy.
Uh, I'm just gonna touch on a couple
of things that Tracy mentioned.
Um, some of these numbers are 8.6 million,
might not seem like big dollars, um, to many.
However, that represents about a $550 increase
for our average rate payer.
Uh, if we were to, uh, if the status quo remained,
and essentially that's where about 12 months ago, we had
to take the approach on asking our community
if they wanted to divest.
And it was one of the most, uh,
probably engaged community consultations that we had had.
To me, uh, acting Mayor Tracy's point, we had had a number
of people come back really talking about the
isolation and what that looked like.
And a lot of our buildings, in fact, all
of our buildings are only one storied buildings.
Um, however, 'cause the age that they were built,
they are fairly, uh, they stand slightly higher.
So they sort of class as almost a two story building
just because of how they're built.
And I guess the structure of their roofing framing, most
of our buildings are, uh, timber frame
and timber, um, rafters.
So I guess relatively, um, relatively flexible in
how they would perform in an earthquake.
Um, just personally, I want to mention, I I lived
through the Christchurch earthquake in 2011,
so fully understand, um,
why the legislation did what it did.
Um, and I guess CODC is in support of, um, having a review
of that and looking at a, a sort of case by case basis.
Um, it is really important.
We do have, um, just across our, uh,
normal building maintenance,
we do have some structural work in play.
And I guess one of our things
that we are looking at right now is just understanding
where this, um, legislation is heading.
And I guess, uh, operationally and,
and with our governance group here would be in support
working through that with you
as well and what that looked like.
So, um, just to me, Tracy's point,
thank you very much for, for hearing us.
It's, it's really, really important.
This is a crucial part for, uh, our communities where some
of our halls are servicing up to a maximum of sort of four
or 500 people and they might not have another hall, uh,
within about a, a half an hour radius of them.
So, um, from an isolation point of view,
and being only rural communities here under that 10,000, um,
they're a really important thing that we want to be able
to work as much as we can to prolong our holes in, I guess,
the most efficient and safe way possible.
So that's probably from me. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you. Um, just a question
and from me, I don't see any
of my colleagues at this stage want to question,
but, um, so you are talking
and in your submission you said you currently own 15
earthquake prone buildings,
you got four you're gonna get get, you're gonna get rid of,
then you've got 11 left.
Um, so the way I read the, um, the matrix for the,
this proposed in this legislation, all of them would then be
potentially, they'll be on the earthquake pro building
register, but you wouldn't actually have to do anything
other than display the notice
and have them, you know, somewhere
that people can find 'em online as well.
That's how we read them. Yeah, correct.
You're, and you're happy, you're happy with that.
That saves you the 8.6 million unless you decide to do work
because you really think that
something needs work done on it.
Uh, yeah, we wouldn't be spinning up
to the eight in 6 million, but we're definitely doing some
work across some of the buildings anyway.
But it would, would at least give us
the option for that. Yeah.
And, uh, across your district as well, I mean, um,
other buildings that, uh, are owned by the community
that are, I mean, you will presumably have a,
a earthquake prone building list of some sort,
which will include other people's buildings as well.
I'm presuming that's considerably more than
the 15 we just talked about.
Um, but I, I expect all
of them will be in the same situation.
You're not gonna have a lot of tall,
tall buildings. That's correct. Yeah.
Yep. That's, that's correct.
Yeah, I can't think of anything
that's multi-story when it comes to our community buildings,
uh, at all actually. So we have
Some masonry,
which would be the primary concern under the new
legislation, but we'd be targeting the masonry directly
rather than building to the NBS standard.
Yeah. Okay. So, so then it's a very pragmatic response to
looking at buildings which you actually think are
problematic and doing something with those as opposed
to just being triggered by a set of rules and MBS.
That's correct, yes. Okay. That's very helpful. Thanks.
Yeah, thanks. Just following up, um, on your, you know,
you wouldn't spend the 8.6 all of it where you,
you spend some of it sort of doing some work.
How have you sort of, have you thought about
how you would approach the prioritization
of the work that you would do?
Yeah, I guess, um, we had a building assessment done
probably about 18 months ago across all of our buildings
to help us prioritize the most
important to the least important.
And the, um, the, just in our submission
before divesting any buildings was, was sort of sitting
around about that $10 million.
Um, that number came from about 18 months ago.
It's obviously gonna be considerably higher now,
however, we were looking to work
through those buildings over the next 10 years
based on those priorities.
So, um, I think we would take the same approach, uh,
just based on that assessment
and depending on obviously the change in legislation we
would have that re-looked at, um, by an engineer just
to make sure we're in line with that.
But, um, we had prioritized,
based on the most important two least important
over, over 10 years
Now, cover images of the remediation we did at the
building we felt was the most risk.
And that's already taken place. Yeah.
Okay. So that prioritization process is based on risk
rather than, you know, I guess what I'm trying to get at is
how the council would look to prioritize
with if this bill goes through.
Yeah. You, you've said that you'll still prioritize some of
that spend, but not all of it.
Would it be towards, um, mitigating, you know, the, some
of the historical nature or heritage value, um,
buildings in your area?
Would it be those buildings that perhaps are used
or utilized by more people than, than not?
Or is that not really work
that you've, that you've done yet?
Uh, we haven't done too much of that work,
but it would be more around, um, buildings
that are probably closer to say, road frontage compared
to buildings that are set back on a reserve, for example.
So just, uh, I guess where they might be pose a high risk
for, for anybody rather than just the people
in the immediate vicinity.
Um, and then work through that.
Uh, and obviously the heritage
component's really important as well.
That's great. Thank you. Thank you.
Look, that's, that's really appreciated.
Um, I think, don't see any further questions. Okay.
Thank you very much. Really appreciate it.
Thank you. Thank, appreciate it. Cheers.
Okay, now we've got, uh, again, via Zoom, Stuart Oliver,
structural Structural Engineering Society of New Zealand.
Sorry about that. Um, good afternoon. Um, good,
We've got, we've got you down for, um, for 10 minutes.
Um, yep. And I'll give you a call with about four to go.
You can take your submission as read, um,
and, uh, you know, we,
we do like asking questions at the end, so,
um, in your time.
Very good. Okay.
So I guess in terms of who we are, um, you know,
we represent three and a half thousand structural engineers.
And in terms of what our members do, um, we basically, um,
provide advice to building owners in terms of
what their obligations under the new legislation would be.
And we help them, um, understand what their requirements are
and if there's any remediation requirements required
for earthquake crime building, um, we help them, um,
with the way through that as well.
So that's kind of our kind of context.
Um, in general, cs o supports the government's intention
to simplify the process of identification
and strength strengthening of these buildings.
Um, and you also support the focus on, um, you know,
the focus on the highest risk buildings.
We think that's really good. Um,
there's four areas we think the build could be improved.
Um, and the first of these, um, relates
to un reinforc masonary buildings in low sizeism lake zones.
So we're talking about den um,
experience in past earthquakes.
Modern earthquakes has shown us that, um,
un reinforc buildings are very vulnerable to damage.
Um, and, you know,
and even modest buildings, you know,
we've got examples in 2007 in Gisborne, 2014,
the South Napa earthquake, and even in Melbourne in 2021
and all those earthquakes we saw un strengthened, unsecured,
imaginary falling onto the street
as a result of those earthquakes.
Um, and, and that endangers pedestrians.
Um, we know
that Auckland in the past has
experienced some pretty big earthquakes.
There was a 6.5 in South Auckland in in
18 80, 18 35, sorry.
And if we had a similar event now, um,
we're just concerned about the volume of masonry
that might fall on busy streets in Auckland.
Um, I'm talking about up Queen Street, K Road,
SBY Road and streets like that.
Um, and we know that, um, facade
and power securing is a cost effective way
to prevent masonary falling on the streets.
Um, so we recommended the EPB framework be extended
to include unreinforced masonary buildings in low seismic
zones and urban centers with high pedestrian traffic
to address that, that significant risk.
Um, the second area for improvement also relates
to army reinforc masonary buildings.
Um, we believe that any army reinforc masonary building
that undergoes a change of use, um, be that in a higher
or low seismic zone or inside
or outside an urban center,
that the building should be subject
to mandatory strengthening or facades securing.
And this is because when a building undergoes a chain
of use, um,
this generally generally signals a significant long-term
investment from the building owner, um,
and usually involves significant refurbishment.
And it really makes sense to, to, to do that.
Safety improvements then,
and this is consistent with what's historically been the
intent of the change of use criteria in the building act.
And that's basically to progressively improve
our building stock over time.
Um, and to ensure that if a building undergoes a change
of use and maybe there's a higher occupant occupancy
category, maybe converting upper levels
of a year end building into apartments, we don't wanna,
we wanna make sure that we don't make,
we don't increase the public safety risks.
So it's, so that's a good time to do it.
That's the second one. The third area
we think it could be improved also relates
to building change of use.
And we're a bit, and we are quite concerned
that the proposed changes to section 1 1 5 will have,
will have some, um,
possibly some unintended consequences in low seismic
zones as drafted.
The current changes will permit all buildings
and low seismic zones to undergo a change
of use without any check
for its seismic performance with nothing.
That's right. Um, you know, same same reasons.
The change of use provision there
to make buildings firstly safer
and not to increase public risk, public life safety risk.
And the last area of improvement relates to the narrowing
of the any time pathways proposed in the, in the amendment,
the territorial authorities used, um, the existing
and anytime pathways to manage buildings
that have a very high risk.
Um, and the proposed narrowing
of the time pathways will mean that
that tool won't be available,
and that will mean that any kind of known
or emerging risks, um,
and that don't meet the, the what is defined as an EPB,
the councils can't use this pathway
to manage these buildings.
So good examples of these would be in the UK
where they had some problems with a product called, uh,
reinforced, although clay rated concrete panels, um,
those panels became really badly degraded over time,
and they represented a significant loss safety risk,
and those bills need to be remediated.
Now, if that happened in New Zealand, those
that wouldn't been classified as an EPB,
so there's no way the councils could use that.
Um, so really we think that either the,
the proposed at any time pathway detailed in the bill
should be amended, um, such that it can be used
by territorial authority.
So they have the management mechanisms they need
to address really high risk buildings, um,
and we agree it should be for very high risk, um,
situations, or B um,
the dangerous building provisions within the ACT are amended
so that there's a mechanism that councils can use
to address these sort of unusual
and unknown risks, um, that,
that some existing buildings, um, pose to the public.
And that's me.
Look. Thank you, uh, very much.
Um, Stuart, uh, questions, colleagues, thank Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Can I ask you about Auckland,
Northland and the Chathams?
Yes. So your sort of concluding points there are,
well certainly the, um, Auckland
and Northland, so I'm concern
that they, that they're excluded.
Yes. And it's mainly, yes, I am,
I'm not less worried about the CHATHAMS for Auckland.
I'm, we're mainly really worried about these URM buildings,
these brick buildings on busy, um, urban centers
and streets, and that they are a significant risk.
I wouldn't be worried about the chathams
because I don't think they have any, um,
Yeah, I was asking that for completeness.
Sorry. Yes, I apologize.
No, no, not that may be
listening or watching this in the future.
Okay, thanks. Okay, Simon.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chip.
Um, I'm interested in, in whether
the legislation is calibrated, right, given
that MBS advice was that the benefits of the rules
to Auckland, uh, versus the cost are about 1700
to one cost to benefit ratio.
So while I understand your concern
that there are some buildings in Auckland
that will miss out, isn't it simply the case
that the likelihood of an earthquake, the magnitude
that would cause that, uh, solar, that
actually it makes sense to exclude
Auckland rather than driving this enormous cost
onto Auckland Building owners?
Um, I don't think it is a big cost.
You're talking about tens of thousands of dollars to,
to look at a, a a a, a facade retrofit.
A parapet is even less than that.
And a para could be strengthened for, I don't know,
less than $10,000 if you as part of some roof,
um, maintenance works.
Um, personally I think this,
I don't think the settings are high enough,
but ultimately that's a public decision that the public has
to bear, which I guess is partly the
process that we're doing now.
It's not, it's not the engineers
to say what's good enough and what isn't.
We are just here trying to, um, provide our view of
what we think is an appropriate level and,
and to hopefully convey the significant risks
that there's unreinforced measurement buildings posed
to pedestrians on the street.
That was the question I was gonna ask you as well.
Um, so, and I've got no idea when I, you know,
walked down Queen Street, uh, for example, uh,
or indeed many of those other, um, uh, centers in,
in Auckland, how many
of those buildings are actually unreinforced masonry
as opposed to say, reinforced concrete, whatever.
But there are clearly a large number of older
heritage type buildings, uh, there, which may well be,
um, and they're quite big.
And I can't imagine the cost
of strengthening those will be a few tens of thousands.
I would imagine it'll be considerably more than that.
But you are the, um, you are the expert, uh,
in terms of engineering.
Um,
Can, can I comment on that? What
The cost, what what sort of cost
for those kind of buildings? They're not gonna be small.
Yeah, so I was talking about these two
or three story buildings,
Okay. Talking
About tens of thousands based on some work that was done,
I think it was in the be of the report to, to, um,
support the, the changes to the, to the review.
If you're talking about some of those larger buildings down
and you're talking about, you know, some of, yes,
That's the kind of thing, They're a lot more,
but you need to bear in mind that those larger buildings,
they can also also worth a lot more
and they can get better leasing rates for those buildings.
Um, and if you put those,
if you put those requirements in a long enough timeframe
as part as those buildings undergo maintenance and, uh,
and renewal, um, these works to be done as part of that.
So, um, I think I'm this worried about those buildings.
I'm more worried about this, the smaller buildings, um,
you know, the one or two story high buildings,
maybe upper Queen Street or Ponsonby
or so forth, I think, um, it's probably a bit harder
for their building owners,
but I think the risks on those busy urban streets are still
there and they need to be acknowledged.
So, so, so sorry, when you're saying you are less worried
about them, are you less worried about them
because there's a revenue stream which is much higher
to be able to support work rather than, okay.
Not, it's not a ma matter
of less worried, but physical risk,
Ah, sorry. It's a financial
risk and I'm getting you a bit
outside matter of competence,
but yes, that's, that's, that's one those one.
Stuart, thank you very much. We really appreciate that.
Cool. Thank you very much. Good luck. Thank you.
Right. Uh, that takes us to the property council.
We've got property council on Zoom On Zoom. Yep. Cool.
Catch us.
Right? Welcome. Nice to have you here.
Um, so look, we've got your, um, we've got your submission,
which you can take us read, uh, we've got you down
for 10 minutes, and, um, I'll give you a call
with about four to go if you're still speaking, um, just
to try and allow some time for, for questions.
But, uh, in your, in your hands,
Uh, well good afternoon and, and, and thank you chair
and members of the committee for the opportunity
to speak to our submission.
Uh, um, we really appreciate your time.
Uh, my name is Greg Tulley. I'm from Kiwi Property.
Uh, but today I speak on behalf of the property council,
PCNZ, and I'm joined
by Elia from the Property Council Advocacy Team.
Um, I'd like
to begin briefly introducing PCNZ Property Council.
New Zealand is a, the leading national voice
for the property industry.
Property is the country's leading largest industry
by GDP Contribution.
Property Council is a not-for-profit organization
representing more than 550 member companies can,
connecting over 10,000 property professionals across the
commercial, industrial, retail, and residential sectors.
Our members include developers, building owners, investors,
managers, community housing providers, councils,
and public sector institutions.
Our purpose is simple, together shaping cities
where communities thrive.
We advocate for the, for a building environment
that is functional, sustainable, and equitable,
and for regulatory settings
that enable rather than constrain good development outcomes.
Turning now to the outcomes, uh, uh,
to our comments on the bill.
Firstly, we'd like to, uh, congratulate the government
and acknowledge the work that has gone
into the development of the bill.
Reform in this area is complex
and we acknowledge the work involved in progressing it.
We also thank Minister Pink for recognizing the need
for change and engaging constructively
with the property sector.
To develop a more effective
and workable framework,
we strongly support the overall direction of the bill.
Providing the sector with more certainty
by removing earthquake ratings
and focusing attention on buildings
that are most at risk is a significant
and positive step forward.
It gives owners, investors, and occupiers clearer signals
and helps focus resources where they matter most.
That said, there are a few areas
where we think further thought would be beneficial.
First off, clause six amendment
to section 1 1 15, change of use.
The proposed amendment to section 1 1 15 would mean
that earthquake prone buildings undergoing a change
of use would only need
to meet the mitigation requirements under the earthquake
prone building system, rather than be strengthened
to higher standards.
We understand the intent of this amendment,
however, we do have concerns about how it would,
it would operate in practice.
For example, if an owner converts an old office building
into a school or a hospital uses
with significantly higher occupancy
or more vulnerable occupants re require only the minimum
seismic strengthening under the bill,
but may not, may not provide an appropriate level
of protection for that increased risk profile
that could lead to an unintended consequences
where buildings are technically compliant
but not necessarily resilient enough for the new use,
potentially exposing occupants to greater risk.
We recommend that section 1 1 15 be clarified
to better illustrate how it would apply where a change
of use results in significantly higher
occupancy or vulnerability.
So that fi seismic performance expectations
properly reflect the nature
and intensity of the new use
transitional period to the new system.
We also want to highlight the potential market implication
of the transitional arrangements.
The bill seems to assume
that owners will hold assets long term.
In practice. Properties change hands frequently
during the transitional period.
Each transfer of ownership
will likely trigger building assessments under the new
methodology to be sought by varying parties
involved in the transaction.
That could create uncertainty for buyers, lenders,
investors, particularly in the early stage
of implementation.
At the same time, territorial authorities will need
to assess existing buildings under the new regime
without mechanism to manage workload
or streamline processes.
There's a real risk of delays
and bottlenecks, which could slow transactions
and increase market risk.
We recommend that gov
that the government consider introducing a fast track
or simplified assessment pathway
for buildings changing ownership
during the transitional period of sale
that would help the property market continue
to function efficiently, while still ensuring that seismic
and safety requirements are appropriately applied.
It's about striking the right balance between public safety
and the practical realities of a dynamic property market.
Uh, next clause, 1 3 3, I, uh, ident
identification of post 1976 buildings.
We are generally supportive of this clause,
which allows territorial authorities
to identify certain post 1976 buildings as earthquake prone.
It's important that risk management isn't limited solely
to the pre 1976 building stock.
However, we find the practical application
of the clause is less clear.
A territorial authority may only identify a post 1976
building as earthquake prone if it has reason to
suspect the building meets the criteria.
While that works in pr, in principle, it's not obvious
how concerns about these buildings would typically come
to the attention of the authority.
In reality, this may rely on an owner
or an occupant raising concerns,
and that would likely require obtaining
engineering advice first.
Given the cost of that advice, there's a real risk
that this becomes a barrier in practice.
As a result, some
of our members question whether this pathway
will widely be used at all.
Uh, further the Health
and Safety at Work Act Amendment bill,
um, we would like to touch on the Health
and Safety Act work amendment bill.
Uh, we welcome the introduction of the bill, given that it
aims to provide greater clarity around how
that act interacts with other legislative regimes,
including in particular the Building Act 2004.
This is both timely and important.
We believe our members see it as essential
that building owner obligations under the health
and safety framework
and the proposed seismic reforms are clearly understood,
particularly given how strong, how,
how strongly the ACT influences market behavior
and expectations around safety.
We are pleased that the bill recognizes that
where a person complies
with relevant requirements under other legislation
to manage a risk, they are treated as having complied
with the corresponding duty under the act for the same risk.
That clarification will go a long way toward reducing
uncertainty for property owners
and occupiers about the scope of their obligations.
We look for forward to engaging further
during the public consultation phase.
Uh, in closing, uh, we support the intent
and direction of this reform.
It is genuine. It is a genuine opportunity
to create a seismic system that is clear,
more proportionate, and more focused on real risk.
Our comments today are offered in the spirit, in
that spirit, not to slow progress,
but to help ensure the framework works
as intended in practice, supports public safety
and remains workable for the PO property sector.
Uh, we appreciate the co, uh, ability today to,
to come and contribute.
Thank you.
Thank you. Okay, colleagues.
Um, we've got about a minute left.
Uh, any questions, Simon?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, just wanna, uh,
explore a little bit more about the transitional
period of the new system.
Uh, you make a clear point that, um,
there could be a massive workload
for territorial authorities.
Uh, so what do you consider as a practical way to flag, uh,
this quite plan building
or is during a transaction
that doesn't necessarily trigger an entire assessment?
Is it simply, um, just putting a note on the title
or what is it?
Yeah. Um, we've had several different sort
of thoughts on this, but, um, I, that, that,
that could be one of them.
Um, uh, what were some of the other ones
that were raised? I, um,
That's probably the most common one.
Yeah. That I feel that came
through probably the most easiest one.
Um, most workable.
Uh, but yeah, we'll, we can take that back
and discuss further, but that seemed
to make the most sense in the time period.
Yeah. Okay. It's just
About ensuring that we don't get
that bottleneck and don't Yeah.
Because it, that area is a risk obviously,
And hopefully it could move quite
quickly if it's done that way.
Okay. So that would flag to the territorial authority
that there is a potential risk that needs
to be investigated, um, that assessment to come later.
Yeah. Uh, but in the meantime, those who are
actually seeking to redevelop these structures in buildings,
um, would,
wouldn't find themselves caught up in a massive bottleneck
with people simply transacting property.
Yes. Okay. Helpful. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Look our time's up.
I really appreciate it. And, uh, and thank you.
Thank you so much. Thank you. Bye. Okay.
Um, now are you expecting the mayor? You are? I'm Mr.
Chairman. Yes. Right in that case,
we will not start without him.
Thank you very much. Um, good. Right. Okay.
I was, I'll be most disappointed if, uh, he be for,
so I think so look, what we'll do is we'll take a, a break,
uh, until he arrives.
Um, and when he arrives, we'll start,
and we won't wait longer than that, but, uh,
'cause you're not scheduled until four 50
and it's, uh, 4 43 now.
So at any moment, um, we will start. So don't go too far.
Welcome. How are you?
Oh, very well, thank you. Good. It's good to hear.
Good to hear. So welcome. Good to have you here.
Um, Lee, nice to see you too, and the colleagues as well.
You familiar,
Familiar faces, so, right.
Um, I, we've got you down for 10 minutes, um,
and I'll give you a call when there's four to go.
If there's any slippage, we'll, um, we'll accommodate that.
Sure. No, thank you very much. Well, thank you.
And, um, I'll look, um, speak to sort
of the outline of the submission.
I think, uh, and my colleague counselor will talk
to the issue about, um, support for partner owners, um,
and then we'll sort of just to pick it up from there.
I think so look, um, look, overall,
the Wellton City Council supports the, uh, the intent
of the bill and, um, the move to,
I think a more proportionate, um, risk-based approach to
managing earthquake, prime building.
So we accept that and li ho I think play the integral role
and, um, assisting officials
and the minister with the policy development around it.
So, um, we're very pleased to see that.
Um, notwithstanding that we think there are some areas that,
um, do warrant the committee's attention.
Um, there are four areas in particular
that I want to address today.
The first is about support for apartment owners.
Um, and we know this is a big,
this has been a big deal under the current
regime for apartment owners.
Um, and we expect it will continue under the, um,
the policy, um, that the legislation has passed
and its current form.
Um, I won't say much more than that.
I'll ask my colleague, um, counselor Uba to speak to
that, uh, point now.
Thank you. Your, um, I just would like to begin
by emphasizing the need
for meaningful central government support, particularly
for owners of multiunit apartment buildings.
Apartment owners will continue
to face disproportionate financial
and practical impacts under the earthquake
home building regime.
Um, as your worship has mentioned, um, for many, uh,
owner occupiers, these promises are primary homes
and key retirement assets.
Strengthening costs, uh,
for large multi owner buildings frequently exceed
what individual owners can reasonably afford.
Despite the proposed system changes, uh,
many owners will remain unable to strengthen, unable
to sell, and unable
to exit ownership without significant loss.
These challenges are compounded by limited access
to affordable finance and ongoing insurance uncertainty.
And in the absence of targeted government assistance
and enabling measures, um, such as low interest
or suspensory loans, technical and project support
and greater certainty around insurance, there is a real risk
of ongoing non-compliance,
which will undermine both housing stability
and confidence in the regulatory system.
I'd just like to highlight that the amount of build, uh,
apartment buildings that are subject to earthquake prone,
um, building requirements were reduced from 186
to 91 45 units will be, will benefit from these changes.
But unfortunately, 1,250 apartment owners
across the 91 buildings will, um,
still suffer financially under this.
Um, so I think you I'll pass that back over to Ms. Bishop.
Thank you. And, um, the next point just want to raise is,
is just about the enforcement tools in the bill.
Um, and this has been, uh, under the current regime,
an ongoing issue is that councils have territorial,
authorities have limited means
to enforce the strengthening requirements.
Um, and Wellington City Council's experiences
that it has had to, to go to court and,
and also deal with appeals against, um, measures
to require, um, building owners to, um,
to meet the requirements to strengthen their buildings.
And we just think, um, some other measures, uh,
would be helpful to allow, uh, territorial authorities
to get building owners to, um,
to do the work that is required.
There might. The next two, um,
points I wanna make are really the things I wish
to highlight on behalf of the Wellington City Council.
Um, because they kind of bear upon the risk to people
and the risk to human life.
Um, and Bill as currently drafted, um, means
that there may not be, um, much improvement in terms
of the risk to people in these circumstances.
The first is, um, changes to any time provisions.
Um, so the bill, um,
uh, has restrictions on identifying earthquake pine
buildings after the initial identification period.
And, um, the experience of the Wellington City Council is
that we, the council officials are still coming across
buildings built, um, before 1976, um,
but which are clearly earthquake prone.
And so putting a restriction on it
and look there, there may not be many, we just dunno
how many there are, but, um, but there are buildings
and buildings that officials have come across are well used.
Um, if they're not subject to strengthening,
then in an earthquake, then obviously human life is at risk.
And we just think that, um, the system needs to be able
to cope with updated information that demonstrates a risk,
um, for those buildings.
And then the final point I want to touch on is, is the, um,
change of use provisions, uh, applying only
to earthquake prone buildings.
Um, and it's the, uh, council's submission that,
um, those, um, cha those change
of use provisions in the legislation should apply
to all buildings, not just to, um,
the earthquake prone buildings.
Um, the, uh, change use change
of use can happen at any time.
Um, and, um, the, um,
sign, uh, the significance of this is that if, if, if
use changes and, and continues to put people at risk
or puts more people at risk, then it's important
that a building can, uh, uh, be required
or should be required, um, to, uh, be strengthened in order
to minimize that, uh, that particular risk.
So our recommendation is that the change of use relaxation
be limited to earthquake prone buildings only so
that the policy intent, um, can be achieved, um,
without unintended consequences.
Um, those are our submissions
and happy to take any questions.
Thank you very much and thank you for what's a very,
very extensive, um, submissions our colleagues.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Mayor team, um, your submission talks about, um,
sort of capital E
and a few others there around, you know,
1, 2, 3 story buildings we've heard today from Nelson
Cathedral, for example.
Is it a one story, you know, building, um, in terms
of the definitions to capture what needs to be captured?
Do you have any views on, on what should be in the bill
or is it more around working in partnership
with local councils, um, around what might be some
of bespoke arrangements for things like
cathedrals or something similar?
I I expect it's gonna be recognizing that, that,
that the story's definition doesn't fit.
For example, those, those sorts of buildings
that might be a, a, a single, um, floor that is used,
but structure as such
and particularly high structures are such that the, the risk
or the danger is there.
Um, I don't know, Liam, do, have you
got any proposals about, um, suggestions about alternative
terms or phrases that might cover the issue?
I think, uh, Mr.
Chairman, and thank you for your question.
Um, I, I'd probably recommend, particularly for capital E,
we have a certain view, obviously, um, about whether, um,
it is earthquake prone or not.
It has quite a substantial subfloor structure as well.
So that was the clarity we were looking for.
But Jenny might be able to ride some assistance
to the, um, to the committee.
But from a reg regulatory perspective,
I'd say the most important thing is that it's clear
and easy to apply, um, from a risk perspective,
especially when talking about unreinforced masonry
buildings, I think it makes sense to have some kind
of height threshold, uh, instead of, um,
the specific number of flaws that may,
that may trigger into a three story category.
Okay. Thank you, uh, Simon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, look, I'm interested in some evidence that was
provided today by the Wellington,
uh, historic places
and Wellington character charitable Trust
about the Wellington Town Hall, uh, repairs,
which I'd always understood to be driven by seismic risk,
but is it correct, do you have any knowledge
of decisions made apparently over a hundred changes in scope
requested by Wellington City Council during the course
of the renovation project, including installing
what sounded like an audio recording suite in the basement
after the base isolation work had been carried out?
Is that something that you're aware of?
Ye yes. The, um, the,
after the project commenced, there were a number
of variations including adding the, um, state
of the art recording suite.
I don't know the order of, um, events in terms
of whether the base isolation had concluded
or, um, whether it followed that,
but, um, Liam, you might have some,
I'm sorry, I, Mr. Chairman, I,
I wasn't, um,
Well, I, I might, I might be able to answer that.
Yes. Perhaps, you know, a little bit more
A prior knowledge.
Yeah, I, yeah, yeah,
I think there were a lot of, a lot of changes.
I never heard of any changes, so I
don't know where they, those happened. Uh, Liam, it wasn't,
Sorry, it's just, yeah. Again,
out of my portfolio, I'm afraid. Yeah.
Um, you done Simon.
Well, I mean, what we are here
to look at is whether this bill is gonna be effective at
balancing risk and cost.
Um, we know that, you know, in Auckland, for example, um,
the, the cost benefit ratio is about 1700 costs to what we,
for every dollar of benefit gained on the current rules.
So I'm just wondering, uh, if the mayor
of Burlington City Council has any perspective on
what the savings are likely from these changes
to the city's own budget.
Uh, there, there will be savings, um, Mr.
Court, and that's why, you know, the, the city council is,
is broadly supportive of the bill
and the direction of the policy.
Um, and we know we've talked about capital E
and, um, associated with that is the to see bridge.
Um, and so as we understand the application of the,
the new standards, it will mean that there'll be, um, work
that we won't need to do.
We will still do some work, um, to, to, you know,
ensure it is of quality and safe,
but it won't be to the extent that it would
otherwise been required.
And that's why I think the, if anybody's talking about the
Wellington Town Hall, there's quite a different set
of factors that go into that issue that won't apply to, uh,
swag of other buildings in Wellington that would,
that would benefit from the policy change.
But we will still need some attention.
And the bottom line still has
to be about whether there is a, a reasonable risk of, um,
risk to the safety of, of people
that we need to minimize that risk
Done. Okay. Uh,
question from me.
Um, got a bit of luxury here
because it's the last minute of the day
and, uh, we're ahead of time anyway.
Um, so I think, um, in terms of buildings, we, number
of buildings have been raised because quite a number
of well submitters, um, come in.
Um, and point was made about several buildings,
which have been strengthened once already.
Uh, the Opera House was mentioned, museum of City
and Sea, Berkeley Dard was mentioned as well.
Mm-hmm. Um, is there a situation where
we should actually be saying, okay,
strengthened at point in time?
It was deemed okay then, and then the rules got changed.
Uh, now it's no longer, um, deemed okay.
Uh, now changing the rules again,
may put it back to being okay, may not.
But, um, do you think there's a sort of,
this double jeopardy is a bit of a problem
that we should try and avoid doing?
I think the point is about, um, having a clear set
of rules and a consistent set of rules.
Uh, I think the concern is that we have a set of rules.
There's a, there's a sort of chopping and changing.
I also think, and I know from my own experience in a
previous role is there are issues about, um, a
an understanding of the rules
and a correct application of them.
So I think what everybody's looking for, including
the Wellington City Council
and I speak to other territorial authorities, is just a,
a consist set of rules that we, we know how to enforce,
can enforce, um,
and can do so in a way that is, um, meaningful
and practical to building owners.
Okay. And look, um, two other questions.
Afnan, you, you said, um, you talked about the number of
large multi owner buildings, um, dropping from 886 to 91 was
that number, you said
1 180 6.
180 6 to 91.
So, so the changes, um, will take a lot
of those buildings off the, the EQP register.
So that will, that will help a lot of owners.
But what you're saying is there's still a bunch left
to be the bigger buildings, which are
still gonna be a challenge.
Yes. So, so yes, 91 buildings, um,
will remain on the list,
but across those 91 buildings,
there is 1,250 apartment owners.
Um, and my con major concern is that they're mostly retirees
or this is their sort of last home.
Um, and it's not financially possible for them
to either comply or sell at this time.
Very familiar with that. Yeah.
And look, um, just one other question if I can,
and that is, um, just
around you made some comments about strategic transport
routes and, um, I know
that's from pa again, from past life.
We, we have past lives, the crossover, um, uh,
just wonder whe what the council's thinking was about
strategic transport routes,
because I can, well remember during the
earthquake we had the, the,
what I call the Crown plaza effect.
So the Crown Plaza building, which sort
of collapsed against a, um, against another building.
It took a long time to take it down.
But in that period, of course,
essentially nobody could go anywhere.
But that falls zone. Now, if you did that in the middle lamp
to key, probably gonna be a little bit
of a problem for a long time.
And that's where that strategic transport routes go through.
What, so can you sort
of expand a little bit on your thinking
around how important.
It's for strategic transport routes to be able to be secure,
um, against buildings sort of collapsing
or endangered, collapsing onto them.
Yeah, sure. Mr. Chairman. So, um, I think the case
probably a good point would be the aviation fuels, um,
that aren't allowed to travel through, um, tunnels.
Tunnels. Mm-hmm. And has to go around the coast.
So when we think about strategic tra transport routes,
we've gotta think about the higher level of priority
and significance we place to building that might be, um,
in threat of collapsing in an earthquake.
And that's, that's the point of submission.
And that that nuance for particular cities
and how they're shaped should be applied in some form
or catered for in the ledge.
That's really gotta be something that's down
to councils to work their way through.
I believe so. It has, yes, that's right.
Okay. And, um, sorry, because Wellington, uh,
because our identification period will have, um,
will have finished, uh, by the time the bill passes,
there'll be no ability for Wellington
to update the strategic transport routes.
And so the request is that during, at least during a period
of transition, um, that there would be some sort
of requirement to, uh, or ability to update those routes.
Okay. Thank you. Appreciate it.
Uh, I don't think I had any other, um, key points.
No. The rest I can answer myself much. Thank you very much.
Really appreciate it. Thank you. Cheers. Thank you.
All very best with everything. Sun
come back too, so that's good.
Good. Smiling on your agenda. Okay.
Alright, we'll just, uh, clear the room
with everybody other than officials for the moment,
just briefly.